The Eastern Orthodox Church,[1] also known as the Orthodox Church,[2] or officially as the Orthodox Catholic Church,[3] is the second-largest Christian Church, with over 250 million members.[4][5] As one of the oldest religious institutions in the world, it has played a prominent role in the history and culture of Eastern Europe, Greece (including Anatolia), the Caucasus, and the Near East.[6] A communion of autocephalous churches (″jurisdictions″, or national churches), each typically governed by its own group of Bishops called a Holy Synod.[2] The Church has no central doctrinal or governance authority analogous to the Roman Catholic Church's pope; however, the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople is recognised by all as primus inter pares ("First among equals") of the bishops.
Eastern Orthodox theology is based in Nicene Creed, and the Eastern Orthodox Church teaches that it is the One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic church established by Jesus Christ in his Great Commission, and that its bishops are the successors of Christ's apostles.[7] It maintains that it practices the original Christian faith, passed down by sacred tradition. Of its several patriarchates four reminiscent the pentarchy, while its autocephalous and autonomous churches reflect a variety of hierarchical organisation. Of its innumerable sacred mysteries, it recognises seven "major sacraments" of which the Eucharist is the principal one, celebrated liturgically in synaxis. The church teaches that through consecration invoked by a priest the sacrificial bread and wine become the body and blood of Christ. Virgin Mary is venerated in the Eastern Orthodox Church as the Mother of God, honoured in devotions.
The contemporary Eastern Orthodox Church shared communion with the contemporary Roman Catholic Church until the East–West Schism in AD 1054, triggered by disputes over doctrine, especially the authority of the Pope. Prior to the Council of Chalcedon in AD 451, also Oriental Orthodox churches shared in this communion, separating primarily over differences in Christology.
The majority of Eastern Orthodox Christians live in Eastern Europe, Greece, and the Caucasus, with smaller communities in the former Byzantine regions of the eastern Mediterranean, Africa, and to a decreasing degree also in the Middle East due to persecution. There are also many in other parts of the world, formed through diaspora, conversions, and missionary activity.
The first known use of the phrase "the catholic church" (he katholike ekklesia) occurred in a letter written about 110 AD from one Greek church to another (Saint Ignatius of Antioch to the Smyrnaeans) The letter states: "Wheresoever the bishop shall appear, there let the people be, even as where Jesus may be, there is the universal [katholike] Church."[37] Thus, almost from the very beginning, Christians referred to the Church as the "One, Holy, Catholic (from the Greek καθολική, or "according to the whole, universal") and Apostolic Church".[38] The Eastern Orthodox Church claims that it is today the continuation and preservation of that same Church.
A number of other Christian churches also make a similar claim: the Roman Catholic Church, the Anglican Communion, the Assyrian Church and the Oriental Orthodox. In the Eastern Orthodox view, the Assyrians and Orientals left the Orthodox Church in the years following the Third Ecumenical Council of Ephesus (431) and the Fourth Ecumenical Council of Chalcedon (451), respectively, in their refusal to accept those councils' Christological definitions. Similarly, the churches in Rome and Constantinople separated in an event known as the East–West Schism, traditionally dated to the year 1054, although it was more a gradual process than a sudden break. The Church of England separated from the Roman Catholic Church, not directly from the Eastern Orthodox Church, for the first time in the 1530s (and, after a brief reunion in 1555, again finally in 1558). Thus, though it was united to Orthodoxy when established through the work of Saint Augustine of Canterbury in the early 7th century, its separation from Orthodoxy came about indirectly through the See of Rome.
To all these churches, the claim to catholicity (universality, oneness with the ancient church) is important for multiple doctrinal reasons that have more bearing internally in each church than in their relation to the others, now separated in faith. The meaning of holding to a faith that is true is the primary reason why anyone's statement of which church split off from which other has any significance at all; the issues go as deep as the schisms. The depth of this meaning in the Eastern Orthodox Church is registered first in its use of the word "Orthodox" itself, a union of Greek orthos ("straight", "correct", "true", "right") and doxa ("common belief", from the ancient verb δοκέω-δοκῶ which is translated "to believe", "to think", "to consider", "to imagine", "to assume").[39]
The dual meanings of doxa, with "glory" or "glorification" (of God by the Church and of the Church by God), especially in worship, yield the pair "correct belief" and "true worship". Together, these express the core of a fundamental teaching about the inseparability of belief and worship and their role in drawing the Church together with Christ.[40][41] The Bulgarian and all the Slavic churches use the title Pravoslavie (Cyrillic: Православие), meaning "correctness of glorification", to denote what is in English Orthodoxy, while the Georgians use the title Martlmadidebeli. Several other churches in Europe, Asia, and Africa also came to use Orthodox in their titles, but are still distinct from the Eastern Orthodox Church as described in this article.
The term "Eastern Church" (the geographic east in the East–West Schism) has been used to distinguish it from western Christendom (the geographic West, which at first came to designate the Roman Catholic communion, later also the various Protestant and Anglican branches). "Eastern" is used to indicate that the highest concentrations of the Eastern Orthodox Church presence remain in the eastern part of the Christian world, although it is growing worldwide. Orthodox Christians throughout the world use various ethnic or national jurisdictional titles, or more inclusively, the title "Eastern Orthodox", "Orthodox Catholic", or simply "Orthodox".[36]
What unites Orthodox Christians is the catholic faith as carried through Holy Tradition. That faith is expressed most fundamentally in Scripture and in worship,[42] and the latter most essentially through the mystery of Baptism and in the Divine Liturgy.[43] The faith lives and breathes by God's energies in communion with the Church. Inter-communion is the litmus test by which all can see that two churches share the same faith; lack of inter-communion (excommunication, literally "out of communion") is the sign of different faiths, even though some central theological points may be shared. The sharing of beliefs can be highly significant, but it is not the full measure of the faith.
The lines of even this test can blur, however, when differences that arise are not due to doctrine, but to recognition of jurisdiction. As the Eastern Orthodox Church has spread into the west and over the world, the church as a whole has yet to sort out all the inter-jurisdictional issues that have arisen in the expansion, leaving some areas of doubt about what is proper church governance.[44] And as in the ancient church persecutions, the aftermath of modern persecutions of Christians in communist nations has left behind both some governance and some faith issues that have yet to be completely resolved.[45]
All members of the Eastern Orthodox Church profess the same faith, regardless of race or nationality, jurisdiction or local custom, or century of birth. Holy Tradition encompasses the understandings and means by which that unity of faith is transmitted across boundaries of time, geography, and culture. It is a continuity that exists only inasmuch as it lives within Christians themselves.[46] It is not static, nor an observation of rules, but rather a sharing of observations that spring both from within and also in keeping with others, even others who lived lives long past. The Holy Spirit maintains the unity and consistency of the Holy Tradition to preserve the integrity of the faith within the Church, as given in the Scriptural promises.[47]
The shared beliefs of Orthodoxy, and its theology, exist within Holy Tradition and cannot be separated from it, for their meaning is not expressed in mere words alone.[48] Doctrine cannot be understood unless it is prayed. [49] Doctrine must also be lived in order to be prayed, for without action, the prayer is idle and empty, a mere vanity, and therefore the theology of demons.[50] According to these teachings of the ancient church, no superficial belief can ever be orthodox. Similarly, reconciliation and unity are not superficial, but are
The religious authority for Eastern Orthodoxy is not a Patriarch or the Pope as in Roman Catholicism, nor the Bible as in Protestantism, but the scriptures as interpreted by the seven ecumenical councils of the Church. The Eastern Orthodox Church is a fellowship of "autocephalous" (Greek for self-headed) Churches, with the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople being the only autocephalous head who holds the title primus inter pares, meaning "first among equals" in Latin. The Patriarch of Constantinople has the honor of primacy, but his title is only first among equals and has no real authority over Churches other than the Constantinopolitan.[1][55][56] The Eastern Orthodox Church considers Jesus Christ to be the head of the Church and the Church to be his body. It is believed that authority and the grace of God is directly passed down to Orthodox bishops and clergy through the laying on of hands—a practice started by the apostles, and that this unbroken historical and physical link is an essential element of the true Church (Acts 8:17, 1 Tim 4:14, Heb 6:2). However, the Church asserts that apostolic succession also requires apostolic faith, and bishops without apostolic faith, who are in heresy, forfeit their claim to apostolic succession.[57]
The Eastern Orthodox communion is organized into several regional churches, which are either autocephalous ("self-headed") or lower ranking autonomous (the Greek term for "self-lawed") church bodies unified in theology and worship. These include the fourteen autocephalous churches of Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, Jerusalem, Georgia, Cyprus, Bulgaria, Serbia, Russia, Greece, Poland, Romania, Albania, and Czech Republic and Slovakia, which were officially invited to the Pan-Orthodox Council of 2016,[58] as well as a number of autonomous Churches.[55] Each church has a ruling bishop and a Holy Synod to administer its jurisdiction and to lead the Orthodox Church in the preservation and teaching of the apostolic and patristic traditions and church practices.
Each bishop has a territory (see) over which he governs.[56] His main duty is to make sure the traditions and practices of the Orthodox Church are preserved. Bishops are equal in authority and cannot interfere in the jurisdiction of another bishop. Administratively, these bishops and their territories are organized into various autocephalous groups or synods of bishops who gather together at least twice a year to discuss the state of affairs within their respective sees. While bishops and their autocephalous synods have the ability to administer guidance in individual cases, their actions do not usually set precedents that affect the entire Eastern Orthodox Church. Bishops are almost always chosen from the monastic ranks and must remain unmarried.
Church councils
There have been a number of times when alternative theological ideas arose to challenge the Orthodox faith. At such times the Orthodox communion deemed it necessary to convene a general or "great" council of all available bishops throughout the world. The Orthodox Church holds that seven ecumenical councils, held between the 4th and the 8th centuries, are authoritative.
Oldest extant manuscript of the Nicene Creed, dated to the 5th Century
The ecumenical councils followed a democratic form, with each bishop having one vote. Though present and allowed to speak before the council, members of the Imperial Roman/Byzantine court, abbots, priests, deacons, monks and laymen were not allowed to vote. The primary goal of these Great Synods was to verify and confirm the fundamental beliefs of the Great Christian Church as truth, and to remove as heresy any false teachings that would threaten the Church. The Pope of Rome at that time held the position of "first among equals" and, while he was not present at any of the councils, he continued to hold this title until the East–West Schism of 1054.
Other councils have helped to define the Eastern Orthodox position, specifically the Quinisext Council, the Synods of Constantinople, 879–880, 1341, 1347, 1351, 1583, 1819, and 1872, the Synod of Jassy (Iași), 1642, and the Pan-Orthodox Synod of Jerusalem, 1672; the Pan-Orthodox Council, held in Greece in 2016, was the only such Eastern Orthodox council in modern times.
According to Orthodox teaching the position of "First Among Equals" gives no additional power or authority to the bishop that holds it, but rather that this person sits as organizational head of a council of equals (like a president). His words and opinions carry no more insight or wisdom than any other bishop. It is believed that the Holy Spirit guides the Eastern Orthodox Church through the decisions of the entire council, not one individual. Additionally it is understood that even the council’s decisions must be accepted by the entire Orthodox Church in order for them to be valid.
One of the decisions made by the First Council of Constantinople (the second ecumenical council, meeting in 381) and supported by later such councils was that the Patriarch of Constantinople should be given equal honor to the Pope of Rome since Constantinople was considered to be the "New Rome". According to the third Canon of the second ecumenical council: "Because it is new Rome, the bishop of Constantinople is to enjoy the privileges of honor after the bishop of Rome." This means that both enjoy the same privileges because they are both bishops of the imperial capitals, but the bishop of Rome will precede the bishop of Constantinople since Old Rome precedes New Rome.
The 28th canon of the fourth ecumenical council clarified this point by stating: "For the Fathers rightly granted privileges to the throne of Old Rome because it was the royal city. And the One Hundred and Fifty most religious Bishops (i.e. the second ecumenical council in 381) actuated by the same consideration, gave equal privileges to the most holy throne of New Rome, justly judging that the city which is honored with the Sovereignty and the Senate, and enjoys equal privileges with the old imperial Rome, should in ecclesiastical matters also be magnified as she is."
Because of the schism the Eastern Orthodox no longer recognize the primacy of the Pope of Rome. The Patriarch of Constantinople therefore, like the Pope before him, now enjoys the title of "first among equals".
Adherents
Distribution of Eastern Orthodox Christians in the world by country:
  More than 75%
  50–75%
  20–50%
  5–20%
  1–5%
  Below 1%, but has local autocephaly
Politics, wars, persecutions, oppressions, and related potential threats[59] can make precise counts of Orthodox membership difficult to obtain at best in some regions. Historically, forced migrations have also altered demographics in relatively short periods of time. The most reliable estimates currently available number Orthodox adherents at around 200 million worldwide,[1] making Eastern Orthodoxy the second largest Christian communion in the world after Roman Catholicism.[60] The numerous Protestant groups in the world, if taken all together, outnumber the Eastern Orthodox,[61] but they differ theologically and do not form a single communion.[60] According to the 2015 Yearbook of International Religious Demography, the Eastern Orthodox population in 2010 decreased to 4% of the global population from 7.1% of the global population in 1910. According to the same source, in terms of the total Christian population, the relative percentages were 12.2% and 20.4% respectively.[62] According to the Pew Research Center, the Eastern Orthodox share of the world's total Christian population was 12% in 2011.[63](p21)
Most members today are concentrated in Eastern Europe and Asian Russia, in addition to significant minorities in Central Asia and the Levant, although Eastern Orthodoxy has spread into a global religion towards Western Europe and the New World, with churches in most countries and major cities. The adherents constitute the largest single religious faith in the world's largest country – Russia,[64][a] where roughly half of Eastern Orthodox Christians live. They are the majority religion in Ukraine,[66][67] Romania,[66] Belarus,[68] Greece,[b][66] Serbia,[66] Bulgaria,[66] Moldova,[66] Georgia,[66] Macedonia,[66] Cyprus,[66] Montenegro,[66] they also dominate in the disputed territories Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Transnistria. Significant minorities of Eastern Orthodox are present in Bosnia and Herzegovina,[66] Latvia,[69] Estonia,[70] Kazakhstan,[71] Kyrgyzstan,[72] Lebanon,[73] Albania,[74] Syria,[66] and many other countries.
The percentage of Christians in Turkey fell from 19 percent in 1914 to 2.5 percent in 1927,[75] predominately due to persecution, including the Armenian Genocide, the Greek genocide and subsequent population exchange between Greece and Turkey,[76] population exchanges between Bulgaria and Turkey, and associated emigration of Christians to foreign countries (mostly in Europe and the Americas).[77] Today there are more than 160,000 people (about 0.2%) of different Christian denominations.[66]
Through mostly labor migration from Eastern Europe and some conversion, Orthodox Christianity is the fastest growing religious grouping in certain Western countries, for example in the Republic of Ireland,[78][79][80] but Orthodoxy is not "a central marker of minority identity" for the migrants.[78] While in the United States, the number of Orthodox parishes is growing.[81][c][d]
Theology
Trinity
Orthodox Christians believe in the Holy Trinity, three distinct, divine persons (hypostases), without overlap or modality among them, who share one divine essence (ousia Greek οὐσία)—uncreated, immaterial and eternal.[85] These three persons are typically distinguished by their relation to each other. The Father is eternal and not begotten and does not proceed from any, the Son is eternal and begotten of the Father, and the Holy Spirit is eternal and proceeds from the Father. Orthodox doctrine regarding the Holy Trinity is summarised in the Nicene Creed.[86]
In discussing God's relationship to His creation, Orthodox theology distinguishes between God's eternal essence, which is totally transcendent, and His uncreated energies, which is how He reaches us. The God who is transcendent and the God who touches us are one and the same. That is, these energies are not something that proceed from God or that God produces, but rather they are God himself: distinct, yet inseparable from, God's inner being.[87]
In understanding the Holy Trinity as "one God in three persons", "three persons" is not to be emphasized more than "one God", and vice versa. While the three persons are distinct, they are united in one divine essence, and their oneness is expressed in community and action so completely that they cannot be considered separately. For example, their salvation of mankind is an activity engaged in common: "Christ became man by the good will of the Father and by the cooperation of the Holy Spirit. Christ sends the Holy Spirit who proceeds from the Father, and the Holy Spirit forms Christ in our hearts, and thus God the Father is glorified." Their "communion of essence" is "indivisible". Trinitarian terminology—essence, hypostasis, etc.—are used "philosophically", "to answer the ideas of the heretics", and "to place the terms where they separate error and truth."[88] The words do what they can do, but the nature of the Trinity in its fullness remains beyond our comprehension and expression, a Holy Mystery that can only be experienced.
Sin, salvation, and the incarnation
John of Damascus
According to the Eastern Orthodox faith, at some point in the beginnings of human existence, man was faced with a choice: to learn the difference between good and evil through observation, or through participation. The biblical story of Adam and Eve relates this choice by mankind to participate in evil, accomplished through disobedience to God's command. Both the intent and the action were separate from God's will; it is that separation that defines and marks any operation as sin. The separation from God caused the loss of (fall from) his grace, a severing of mankind from his creator and the source of his life. The end result was the diminishment of human nature and its subjection to death and corruption, an event commonly referred to as the "fall of man".
When Orthodox Christians refer to Fallen Nature they are not saying that human nature has become evil in itself. Human nature is still formed in the image of God; we are still God's creation, and God has never created anything evil. But our fallen nature remains open to evil intents and actions. It is sometimes said that we are "inclined to sin"; that is, we find some sinful things attractive. It is the nature of temptation to make sinful things seem the more attractive, and it is the fallen nature of humans that seeks or succumbs to the attraction. Orthodox Christians reject the Augustinian position that the descendants of Adam and Eve are actually guilty of the original sin of their ancestors.[89] But just as any species begets its own kind, so fallen humans beget fallen humans, and from the beginning of our existence we lie open to sinning by our own choice.
Since the fall of man, then, it has been mankind's dilemma that no human can restore his nature to union with God's grace; it was necessary for God to effect another change in human nature. Orthodox Christians believe that Christ Jesus was both God and Man absolutely and completely, having two natures indivisibly: eternally begotten of the Father in his divinity, he was born in his humanity of a woman, Mary, by her consent, through descent of the Holy Spirit. He lived on earth, in time and history, as a man. As a man he also died, and went to the place of the dead, which is Hades. But being God, neither death nor Hades could contain him, and he rose to life again, in his humanity, by the power of the Holy Spirit, thus destroying the power of Hades, and of death itself.[90] Through God's participation in humanity, Christ's human nature, perfected and unified with his divine nature, ascended into heaven, there to reign in communion with the Holy Trinity.
By these acts of salvation, Christ provided fallen mankind with the path to escape its fallen nature. The Eastern Orthodox Church teaches that through baptism into Christ's death, and our death unto sin in repentance, with God's help we can also rise with Christ into heaven, healed of the breach of our fallen nature and restored to God's grace. To Orthodox Christians, this process is what is meant by "salvation", which consists of the Christian life. The ultimate goal is theosis – an even closer union with God and closer likeness to God than existed in the Garden of Eden. This very process is called Deification or "God became man that man might become 'god'". However, it must be emphasized that Orthodox Christians do not believe that man literally becomes God in His essence, or a god in his own nature. More accurately, Christ's salvific work enables man in his human nature to become "partakers of the Divine nature" (2 Peter 1:4); that is to say, man is united to God in Christ.
Through Christ's destruction of Hades' power to hold humanity hostage, he made the path to salvation effective for all the righteous who had died from the beginning of time – saving many, including Adam and Eve, who are remembered in the Church as saints.[91]
The Eastern Orthodox reject the idea that Christ died to give God "satisfaction", as taught by Anselm, or as a punitive substitute as taught by the Reformers. Sin (separation from God, the source of all life) is its own punishment, capable of imprisoning the soul in an existence without life, without anything good, and without hope: hell, by any measure. Life on earth is God's gift, to give us opportunity to make our choice real: separation, or union.
Resurrection of Christ
A 17th-century Russian Orthodox icon of the Resurrection.
The Eastern Orthodox Church understands the death and resurrection of Christ Jesus to be real historical events, as described in the gospels of the New Testament. Jesus Christ, the Son of God, was in his humanity (that is, in history) crucified, and died, descending into Hades (Sheol), the place of the dead, as all humans do. But He, alone among humans, has two natures, one human, one divine, which are indivisible and inseparable from each other through the mystery of the incarnation. Hades could not restrain the infinite God. Christ in His divine nature captured the keys of Hades and broke the bonds which had imprisoned the human souls who had been held there through their separation from God.
Neither could death contain the Son of God, the Fountain of Life, who arose from death even in his human nature. Not only this, but he opened the gates of Hades to all the righteous dead of past ages, rescuing them from their fallen human nature and restoring them to a nature of grace with God, bringing them back to life, this time in God's heavenly kingdom. And this path he opened to all who choose to follow him in time yet to come, thus saving the human race. Thus the Eastern Orthodox proclaim each year at the time of Pascha (Easter), that Christ "trampled down death by death, and on those in the tombs bestowed life."
The celebration of the Resurrection of Christ at Pascha is the central event in the liturgical year of the Eastern Orthodox Church. According to Orthodox tradition, each human being may partake of this immortality, which would have been impossible without the Resurrection; it is the main promise held out by God in the New Testament. Every holy day of the Eastern Orthodox liturgical year relates to the Resurrection directly or indirectly. Every Sunday is especially dedicated to celebrating the Resurrection and the triune God, representing a mini-Pascha. In the liturgical commemorations of the Passion of Christ during Holy Week there are frequent allusions to the ultimate victory at its completion.
Christian life
Church teaching is that Orthodox Christians, through baptism, enter a new life of salvation through repentance whose purpose is to share in the life of God through the work of the Holy Spirit. The Eastern Orthodox Christian life is a spiritual pilgrimage in which each person, through the imitation of Christ and hesychasm,[92] cultivates the practice of unceasing prayer. Each life occurs within the life of the Church as a member of the body of Christ.[93] It is then through the fire of God's love in the action of the Holy Spirit that each member becomes more holy, more wholly unified with Christ, starting in this life and continuing in the next.[94][95] The Church teaches that everyone, being born in God's image, is called to theosis, fulfillment of the image in likeness to God. God the creator, having divinity by nature, offers each person participation in divinity by cooperatively accepting His gift of grace.[96]
The Eastern Orthodox Church, in understanding itself to be the Body of Christ, and similarly in understanding the Christian life to lead to the unification in Christ of all members of his body, views the church as embracing all Christ's members, those now living on earth, and also all those through the ages who have passed on to the heavenly life. The church includes the Christian saints from all times, and also judges, prophets and righteous Jews of the first covenant, Adam and Eve, even the angels and heavenly hosts.[97] In Orthodox services, the earthly members together with the heavenly members worship God as one community in Christ, in a union that transcends time and space and joins heaven to earth. This unity of the Church is sometimes called the communion of the saints.[98]
Mother of God and saints
Our Lady of Tinos is the major Marian shrine in Greece
The Theotokos of Vladimir, one of the most venerated of Orthodox Christian icons of the Virgin Mary.
The Eastern Orthodox Church believes death and the separation of body and soul to be unnatural—a result of the Fall of Man. They also hold that the congregation of the Church comprises both the living and the dead. All persons currently in heaven are considered to be saints, whether their names are known or not. There are, however, those saints of distinction whom God has revealed as particularly good examples. When a saint is revealed and ultimately recognised by a large portion of the Church a service of official recognition (canonization) is celebrated.
This does not 'make' the person a saint, it merely recognizes the fact and announces it to the rest of the Church. A day is prescribed for the saint’s celebration, hymns composed and icons are created. Numerous saints are celebrated on each day of the year. They are venerated (shown great respect and love) but not worshiped, for worship is due to God alone. In showing the saints this love and requesting their prayers, the Eastern Orthodox manifest their belief that the saints thus assist in the process of salvation for others.[99]
Pre-eminent among the saints is the Virgin Mary, the Mother of God. In Orthodox theology, the Mother of God is the fulfillment of the Old Testament archetypes revealed in the Ark of the Covenant (because she carried the New Covenant in the person of Christ) and the burning bush that appeared before Moses (symbolizing the Mother of God's carrying of God without being consumed[100]). Accordingly, the Eastern Orthodox consider Mary to be the Ark of the New Covenant and give her the respect and reverence as such. The Theotokos was chosen by God and she freely co-operated in that choice to be the Mother of Jesus Christ, the God-man.
The Eastern Orthodox believe that the Christ Child from the moment of conception was both fully God and fully human. Mary is thus called the 'Theotokos' or 'Bogoroditsa' as an affirmation of the divinity of the one to whom she gave birth. It is also believed that her virginity was not compromised in conceiving God-incarnate, that she was not harmed and that she remained forever a virgin. Scriptural references to "brothers" of Christ are interpreted as kin, given that the word 'brother' was used in multiple ways, as was the term 'father'. Due to her unique place in salvation history, Mary is honored above all other saints and especially venerated for the great work that God accomplished through her.[101]
The Eastern Orthodox Church regards the bodies of all saints as holy, made such by participation in the Holy Mysteries, especially the communion of Christ's holy body and blood, and by the indwelling of the Holy Spirit within the Church. Indeed, that persons and physical things can be made holy is a cornerstone of the doctrine of the Incarnation, made manifest also directly by God in Old Testament times through his dwelling in the Ark of the Covenant. Thus, physical items connected with saints are also regarded as holy, through their participation in the earthly works of those saints. God himself bears witness to this holiness of saints' relics through the many miracles connected with them that have been reported throughout history since Biblical times, often including healing from disease and injury.[102]
Eschatology
Last Judgment: 12th-century Byzantine mosaic from Torcello Cathedral.
Orthodox Christians believe that when a person dies the soul is temporarily separated from the body. Though it may linger for a short period on Earth, it is ultimately escorted either to paradise (Abraham's bosom) or the darkness of Hades, following the Temporary Judgment. Orthodox do not accept the doctrine of Purgatory, which is held by Roman Catholicism. The soul’s experience of either of these states is only a "foretaste"—being experienced only by the soul—until the Final Judgment, when the soul and body will be reunited.[103][104]
The Eastern Orthodox believe that the state of the soul in Hades can be affected by the love and prayers of the righteous up until the Last Judgment.[105] For this reason the Church offers a special prayer for the dead on the third day, ninth day, fortieth day, and the one-year anniversary after the death of an Orthodox Christian. There are also several days throughout the year that are set aside for general commemoration of the departed, sometimes including nonbelievers. These days usually fall on a Saturday, since it was on a Saturday that Christ lay in the Tomb.[104]
Monastery of Saint John the Theologian in Patmos, where the Book of Revelation was written
While the Eastern Orthodox consider the text of the Apocalypse (Book of Revelation) to be a part of Scripture, it is also regarded to be a mystery. Speculation on the contents of Revelation are minimal and it is never read as part of the regular order of services. Those theologians who have delved into its pages tend to be amillennialist in their eschatology, believing that the "thousand years" spoken of in biblical prophecy refers to the present time: from the Crucifixion of Christ until the Second Coming.
While it is not usually taught in church it is often used as a reminder of God’s promise to those who love Him, and of the benefits of avoiding sinful passions. Iconographic depictions of the Final Judgment are often portrayed on the back (western) wall of the church building to remind the departing faithful to be vigilant in their struggle against sin. Likewise it is often painted on the walls of the Trapeza (refectory) in a monastery where monks may be inspired to sobriety and detachment from worldly things while they eat.
The Eastern Orthodox believe that Hell, though often described in metaphor as punishment inflicted by God, is in reality the soul's rejection of God's infinite love which is offered freely and abundantly to everyone.
The Eastern Orthodox believe that after the Final Judgment:
All souls will be reunited with their resurrected bodies.
All souls will fully experience their spiritual state.
Having been perfected, the saints will forever progress towards a deeper and fuller love of God, which equates with eternal happiness.[104]
Bible
The official bible of the Eastern Orthodox Church contains the Septuagint text of the Old Testament, with the Book of Daniel given in the translation by Theodotion. The Patriarchal Text is used for the New Testament.[106] Orthodox Christians hold that the Bible is a verbal icon of Christ, as proclaimed by the 7th ecumenical council.[107] They refer to the Bible as Holy Scripture, meaning writings containing the foundational truths of the Christian faith as revealed by Christ and the Holy Spirit to its divinely inspired human authors. Holy Scripture forms the primary and authoritative written witness of Holy Tradition and is essential as the basis for all Orthodox teaching and belief.[108] The Bible provides the only texts held to be suitable for reading in Orthodox worship services. Through the many scriptural quotations embedded in the worship service texts themselves, it is often said that the Eastern Orthodox pray the Bible as well as read it.
David glorified by the women of Israel from the Paris Psalter, example of the Macedonian art (Byzantine) (sometimes called the Macedonian Renaissance)
St. Jerome completed the well-known Vulgate Latin translation only in the early 5th century, around the time the accepted lists of scripture were resolved in the west. The east took up to a century longer to resolve the lists in use there, and ended by accepting a few additional writings from the Septuagint that did not appear in the lists of the west. The differences were small and were not considered to compromise the unity of the faith shared between east and west. They did not play a role in the eventual schism in the 11th century that separated the See of Rome and the West from the See of Constantinople and the other apostolic Orthodox Churches, and remained as defined essentially without controversy in the East or West for at least one thousand years. It was only in the 16th century that Reformation Protestants challenged the lists, proclaiming a canon that rejected those Old Testament books that did not appear in the 3rd-century Hebrew Bible. In response, the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches reaffirmed their accepted scriptural lists in more formal canons of their own.
Once established as Holy Scripture, there has never been any question that the Eastern Orthodox Church holds the full list of books to be venerable and beneficial for reading and study,[109] even though it informally holds some books in higher esteem than others, the four gospels highest of all. Of the subgroups significant enough to be named, the "Anagignoskomena" (ἀναγιγνωσκόμενα, "things that are read") comprises ten of the Old Testament books rejected in the Protestant canon,[110] but deemed by the Eastern Orthodox worthy to be read in worship services, even though they carry a lesser esteem than the 39 books of the Hebrew canon.[111] The lowest tier contains the remaining books not accepted by either Protestants or Roman Catholics, among them, Psalm 151. Though it is a psalm, and is in the book of psalms, it is not classified as being within the Psalter (the first 150 psalms),[112] and hence does not participate in the various liturgical and prayer uses of the Psalter.
In a very strict sense, it is not entirely orthodox to call the Holy Scriptures the "Word of God". That is a title the Eastern Orthodox Church reserves for Christ, as supported in the scriptures themselves, most explicitly in the first chapter of the gospel of John. God's Word is not hollow, like human words. "God said, 'let there be light'; and there was light."[113] This is the Word which spoke the universe into being, and resonates in creation without diminution throughout all history, a Word of divine power.
As much as the Eastern Orthodox Church reveres and depends on the scriptures, they cannot compare to the Word of God's manifest action. But the Eastern Orthodox do believe that the Holy Scriptures testify to God's manifest actions in history, and that through its divine inspiration God's Word is manifested both in the scriptures themselves and in the cooperative human participation that composed them. It is in that sense that the Eastern Orthodox refer to the scriptures as "God's Word".
The Eastern Orthodox Church does not subscribe to the Protestant doctrine of sola scriptura. The Church has defined what Scripture is; it also interprets what its meaning is.[114] Christ promised: "When He, the Spirit of truth, has come, He will guide you into all truth".[115] The Holy Spirit, then, is the infallible guide for the Church to the interpretation of Scripture. The Church depends upon those saints who, by lives lived in imitation of Christ, achieving theosis, can serve as reliable witnesses to the Holy Spirit's guidance. Individual interpretation occurs within the Church and is informed by the Church. It is rational and reasoned, but is not arrived at only by means of deductive reasoning.
Scriptures are understood to contain historical fact, poetry, idiom, metaphor, simile, moral fable, parable, prophecy and wisdom literature, and each bears its own consideration in its interpretation. While divinely inspired, the text stills consists of words in human languages, arranged in humanly recognizable forms. The Eastern Orthodox Church does not oppose honest critical and historical study of the Bible.[116] In biblical interpretation, it does not use speculations, suggestive theories, or incomplete indications, not going beyond what is fully known.
Holy tradition and the patristic consensus
"That faith which has been believed everywhere, always, and by all", the faith taught by Jesus to the apostles, given life by the Holy Spirit at Pentecost, and passed down to future generations without additions and without subtractions, is known as Holy Tradition.[117][118] Holy Tradition does not change in the Eastern Orthodox Church because it encompasses those things that do not change: the nature of the one God in Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, the history of God's interactions with his peoples, the Law as given to the Israelites, all Christ's teaching as given to the disciples and Jews and recorded in scripture, including the parables, the prophecies, the miracles, and His own example to humanity in His extreme humility. It encompasses also the worship of the church, which grew out of the worship of the synagogue and temple and was extended by Christ at the last supper, and the relationship between God and His people which that worship expresses, which is also evidenced between Christ and his disciples. It includes the authority that Christ bestowed on his disciples when he made them apostles,[119] for the preserving and teaching of the faith, and for governing the organization and conduct of the church (in its administration by bishops).
Holy Tradition is firm, even unyielding, but not rigid or legalistic; instead, it lives and breathes within the Church.[120] For example, the New Testament was entirely written by the early church (mostly the apostles). The whole Bible was accepted as scripture by means of Holy Tradition practiced within the early church. The writing and acceptance took five centuries, by which time the Holy Scriptures themselves had become in their entirety a part of Holy Tradition.[121] But Holy Tradition did not change, because "that faith which has been believed everywhere, always, and by all" remained consistent, without additions, and without subtractions. The historical development of the Divine Liturgy and other worship services and devotional practices of the church provide a similar example of extension and growth "without change".[122]
The continuity and stability of Orthodox worship throughout the centuries is one means by which Holy Tradition expresses the unity of the whole church throughout time. Not only can the Eastern Orthodox of today visit a church in a place that speaks a language unknown to the visitors yet have the service remain familiar and understandable to them, but the same would hold true were any able to visit past eras. The church strives to preserve Holy Tradition "unchanging" that it may express the one unchanging faith for all time to come as well.
Besides these, Holy Tradition includes the doctrinal definitions and statements of faith of the seven ecumenical councils, including the Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed, and some later local councils, patristic writings, canon law, and icons.[116] Not all portions of Holy Tradition are held to be equally strong. Some, the Holy Scriptures foremost, certain aspects of worship, especially in the Divine Liturgy, the doctrines of the ecumenical councils, the Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed, possess a verified authority that endures forever, irrevocably.[116] But with local councils and patristic writings, the Church applies a selective judgement. Some councils and writers have occasionally fallen into error, and some contradict each other.[116]
In other cases, opinions differ, no consensus is forthcoming, and all are free to choose. With agreement among the Fathers, though, the authority of interpretation grows, and full patristic consensus is very strong. With canon law (which tends to be highly rigorous and very strict, especially with clergy) an unalterable validity also does not apply, since canons deal with living on earth, where conditions are always changing and each case is subject to almost infinite variation from the next.[116] Even when and where they were once used with full strictness, their application was not absolute, and was carried out for individuals under the pastoral care of their bishop, who had the authority to decide when individual discipline had been satisfied. This too is a part of the Holy Tradition.
By tradition, the Eastern Orthodox Church, when faced with issues that are larger than a single bishop can resolve, holds a local council. The bishops and such others as may attend convene (as St. Paul called the Corinthians to do) to seek the mind of the church.[123] A council's declarations or edicts then reflect its consensus (if one can be found). An ecumencial council is only called for issues of such import or difficulty or pervasiveness that smaller councils are insufficient to address them. Ecumenical councils' declarations and canons carry binding weight by virtue of their representation across the whole church, by which the mind of the church can be readily seen. However, not all issues are so difficult as to require an ecumenical council to resolve. Some doctrines or decisions, not defined in a formal statement or proclaimed officially, nevertheless are held by the Church unshakably and unanimously without internal disturbance, and these, also reflecting the mind of the church, are just as firmly irrevocable as a formal declaration of an ecumenical council. Lack of formality does not imply lack of authority within Holy Tradition.[116] An example of such unanimity can be found in the acceptance in the 5th century of the lists of books that comprise Holy Scripture, a true canon without official stamp.
Territorial expansion and doctrinal integrity
During the course of the early church, there were numerous followers who attached themselves to the Christ and His mission here on Earth, as well as followers who retained the distinct duty of being commissioned with preserving the quality of life and lessons revealed through the experience of Jesus living, dying, resurrecting and ascending among them. As a matter of practical distinction and logistics, people of varying gifts were accorded stations within the community structure – ranging from the host of agape meals (shared with brotherly and fatherly love), to prophecy and the reading of Scripture, to preaching and interpretations and giving aid to the sick and the poor. Sometime after Pentecost the Church grew to a point where it was no longer possible for the Apostles to minister alone. Overseers (bishops)[124] and assistants (deacons and deaconesses)[125] were appointed to further the mission of the Church.
The ecclesia recognised the gathering of these early church communities as being greatest in areas of the known world that were famous for their significance on the world stage – either as hotbeds of intellectual discourse, high volumes of trade, or proximity to the original sacred sites. These locations were targeted by the early apostles, who recognised the need for humanitarian efforts in these large urban centers and sought to bring as many people as possible into the ecclesia – such a life was seen as a form of deliverance from the decadent lifestyles promoted throughout the eastern and western Roman empire.
As the Church increased in size through the centuries, the logistic dynamics of operating such large entities shifted: patriarchs, metropolitans, archimandrites, abbots and abbesses, all rose up to cover certain points of administration.[126]
As a result of heightened exposure and popularity of the philosophical schools (haereseis) of Greco-Roman society and education, Synods and Councils were forced to engage such schools that sought to co-opt the language and pretext of the Christian faith in order to gain power and popularity for their own political and cultural expansion. As a result, ecumenical councils were held to attempt to rebuild solidarity by using the strength of distant orthodox witnesses to dampen the intense local effects of particular philosophical schools within a given area.
While originally intended to serve as an internal check and balance for the defense of the doctrine developed and spread by the apostles to the various sees against faulty local doctrine, at times the church found its own bishops and emperors falling prey to local conventions. At these crucial moments in the history of the church, it found itself able to rebuild on the basis of the faith as it was kept and maintained by monastic communities, who subsisted without reliance on the community of the state or popular culture and were generally unaffected by the materialism and rhetoric that often dominated and threatened the integrity and stability of the urban churches.
In this sense, the aim of the councils was not to expand or fuel a popular need for a clearer or relevant picture of the original apostolic teaching. Rather, the theologians spoke to address the issues of external schools of thought who wished to distort the simplicity and neutrality of the apostolic teaching for personal or political gain. The consistency of the Eastern Orthodox faith is entirely dependent on the Holy Tradition of the accepted corpus of belief – the decisions ratified by the fathers of the seven ecumenical councils, and this is only done at the beginning of a consecutive council so that the effects of the decisions of the prior council can be audited and verified as being both conceptually sound and pragmatically feasible and beneficial for the church as a whole.
Worship
Fresco of Basil the Great in the cathedral of Ohrid. The saint is shown consecrating the Gifts during the Divine Liturgy which bears his name.
Church calendar
The minority of autocephalous Orthodox Churches, but the majority of the members of the Eastern Orthodox Church follow the Julian calendar [127] The majority of Orthodox autocephalous Churches follow the Revised Julian calendar.[128] The autonomous Church of Finland of the Ecumenical Patriarchate, as well as parts of the Church of the Czech Lands and Slovakia use the Gregorian calendar.[129]
Many church traditions, including the schedules of services, feasts, and fasts, are structured by the church’s calendar, which provides a strictly observed intermingled set of cycles of varying lengths. The fixed annual cycle begins 1 September, and establishes the times for all annual observances that are fixed by date, such as Christmas. The annual Paschal cycle is established relative to the varying date of Pascha each year and affects the times for such observances as Pascha itself, Great Lent, Holy Week, and the feasts of Ascension and Pentecost.
Lesser cycles also run in tandem with the annual ones. A weekly cycle of days prescribes a specific focus for each day in addition to others that may be observed.[130]
Each day of the Weekly Cycle is dedicated to certain special memorials. Sunday is dedicated to Christ's Resurrection; Monday honors the Holy Bodiless Powers (Angels, Archangels, etc.); Tuesday is dedicated to the prophets and especially the greatest of the Prophets, St. John the Forerunner and Baptist of the Lord; Wednesday is consecrated to the Cross and recalls Judas' betrayal; Thursday honors the Holy Apostles and Hierarchs, especially St. Nicholas, Bishop of Myra in Lycia; Friday is also consecrated to the Cross and recalls the day of the Crucifixion; Saturday is dedicated to All Saints, especially the Mother of God, and to the memory of all those who have departed this life in the hope of resurrection and eternal life.
Church services
The services of the church are conducted each day according to the church calendar. Parts of each service remain fixed, while others change depending on the observances prescribed for the specific day in the various cycles, ever providing a flow of constancy within variation. Services are conducted in the church and involve both the clergy and faithful. Services cannot properly be conducted by a single person, but must have at least one other person present (i.e. a Priest cannot celebrate alone, but must have at least a Chanter present and participating).
Usually, all of the services are conducted on a daily basis only in monasteries and cathedrals, while parish churches might only do the services on the weekend and major feast days. On certain Great Feasts (and, according to some traditions, every Sunday) a special All-Night Vigil (Agrypnia) will be celebrated from late at night on the eve of the feast until early the next morning. Because of its festal nature it is usually followed by a breakfast feast shared together by the congregation.
The journey is to the Kingdom. This is where we are going—not symbolically, but really.
— Fr. Alexander Schmemann, For the Life of the World
We knew not whether we were in heaven or on earth.
— Ambassadors of Kievan Rus (10th Century), Apocryphal quote from conversion of Kievan Rus.
Icon of Ss. Basil the Great (left) and John Chrysostom, ascribed authors of the two most frequently used Eastern Orthodox Divine Liturgies, c. 1150 (mosaic in the Palatine Chapel, Palermo).
Services, especially the Divine Liturgy, may only be celebrated once a day on a single altar (some churches have multiple altars in order to accommodate large congregations). Each priest may only celebrate the Divine Liturgy once a day.
From its Jewish roots, the liturgical day begins at sundown. The traditional daily cycle of services is as follows:
Vespers – (Greek Hesperinos) Sundown, the beginning of the liturgical day.
Compline (Greek Apodeipnon, lit. "After-supper") – After the evening meal, and before sleeping.
Midnight Office – Usually served only in monasteries.
Matins (Greek Orthros) – First service of the morning. Prescribed to start before sunrise.
Hours – First, Third, Sixth, and Ninth – Sung either at their appropriate times, or in aggregate at other customary times of convenience. If the latter, The First Hour is sung immediately following Orthros, the Third and Sixth before the Divine Liturgy, and the Ninth before Vespers.
Divine Liturgy – The Eucharist service. (Called Holy Mass in the Western Rite)
The Divine Liturgy is the celebration of the Eucharist. Although it is usually celebrated between the Sixth and Ninth Hours, it is not considered to be part of the daily cycle of services, as it occurs outside the normal time of the world. The Divine Liturgy is not celebrated on weekdays during Great Lent, and in some places during the lesser fasting seasons either; however, reserve communion is prepared on Sundays and is distributed during the week at the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts.
Other items brought to the altar during the Divine Liturgy include a gold or silver chalice with red wine, a small metallic urn of warm water, a metallic communion spoon, a little metallic spear, a sponge, a metal disk with cut pieces of bread upon it, and a star, which is a star-shaped piece of metal over which the priest places a cloth covering when transporting the holy gifts to and from the altar. Also found on the altar table is the antimins. The antimins is a silk cloth, signed by the appropriate diocesan bishop, upon which the sanctification of the holy gifts takes place during each Divine Liturgy. The antimins contain the relics of a saint. When a church is consecrated by a bishop, there is a formal service or prayers and sanctification in the name of the Saint that the church is named after. The bishop will also often present a small relic of a saint to place in or on the altar as part of the consecration of a new church.
The book containing liturgically read portions of the four gospels is permanently "enthroned" on the altar table. The Eastern Orthodox bishops, priests, deacons and readers sing/chant specific verses from this Gospel Book on each different day of the year.
This daily cycle services is conceived of as both the sanctification of time (chronos, the specific times during which they are celebrated), and entry into eternity (kairos). They consist to a large degree of litanies asking for God's mercy on the living and the dead, readings from the Psalter with introductory prayers, troparia, and other prayers and hymns surrounding them. The Psalms are so arranged that when all the services are celebrated the entire Psalter is read through in their course once a week, and twice a week during Great Lent when the services are celebrated in an extended form.
Music and chanting
Chanters singing on the kliros at the Church of St. George, Patriarchate of Constantinople.
Orthodox services are sung nearly in their entirety. Services consist in part of a dialogue between the clergy and the people (often represented by the choir or the Psaltis Cantor). In each case the prayers are sung or chanted following a prescribed musical form. Almost nothing is read in a normal speaking voice, with the exception of the homily if one is given.
Because the human voice is seen as the most perfect instrument of praise, musical instruments (organs, guitars, etc.) are not generally used to accompany the choir.
The church has developed eight modes or tones (see Octoechos) within which a chant may be set, depending on the time of year, feast day, or other considerations of the Typikon. There are numerous versions and styles that are traditional and acceptable and these vary a great deal between cultures.[131] It is common, especially in the United States, for a choir to learn many different styles and to mix them, singing one response in Greek, then English, then Russian, etc.
In the Russian tradition there have been some famous composers of "unaccompanied" church music, such as Tchaikovsky (Liturgy of St John Chrysostom, op. 41, 1878, and All-Night Vigil, op. 52, 1882) and Rachmaninoff (Liturgy of St John Chrysostom, op. 31, 1910, and All-Night Vigil, op. 37, 1915); and many church tones can likewise be heard influencing their music.
Incense
Russian Orthodox Deacon and Priest
As part of the legacy handed down from its Judaic roots, incense is used during all services in the Eastern Orthodox Church as an offering of worship to God as it was done in the Jewish First and Second Temples in Jerusalem (Exodus chapter 30). Incense is also prophesied in the book of Malachi 1:11 as a "pure offering" in the glorification of God by the Gentiles in "every place" where the name of God is regarded as "great". Traditionally, the base of the incense used is the resin of Boswellia sacra, also known as frankincense, but the resin of fir trees has been used as well. It is usually mixed with various floral essential oils giving it a sweet smell.
Incense represents the sweetness of the prayers of the saints rising up to God (Psalm 141:2, Revelation 5:8, 8:4). The incense is burned in an ornate golden censer that hangs at the end of three chains representing the Trinity. Two chains represent the human and Godly nature of the Son, one chain for the Father and one chain for the Holy Spirit. The lower cup represents the earth and the upper cup the heaven. In the Greek, Slavic, and Syrian traditions there are 12 bells hung along these chains representing the 12 apostles. There are also 72 links representing 72 evangelists.
The charcoal represents the sinners. Fire signifies the Holy Spirit and frankincense the good deeds. The incense also represents the grace of the Holy Trinity. The censer is used (swung back and forth) by the priest/deacon to venerate all four sides of the altar, the holy gifts, the clergy, the icons, the congregation, and the church structure itself. Incense is also used in the home where the individual will go around the house and "cross" all of the icons saying in Greek: Ἅγιος ὁ Θεός, Ἅγιος ἰσχυρός, Ἅγιος ἀθάνατος, ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς. or in English: Holy God, Holy Mighty, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us.
Fasting
Blessing of the waters and throwing cross; Theophany
The number of fast days varies from year to year, but in general the Eastern Orthodox Christian can expect to spend a little over half the year fasting at some level of strictness. There are spiritual, symbolic, and even practical reasons for fasting. In the Fall from Paradise mankind became possessed by a carnal nature; that is to say, became inclined towards the passions. Through fasting, Orthodox Christians attempt to return to the relationship of love and obedience to God enjoyed by Adam and Eve in Paradise in their own lives, by refraining from carnal practices, by bridling the tongue (James 3:5–6), confession of sins, prayer and almsgiving.
Fasting is seen as purification and the regaining of innocence. It is a practice of learning to temper the body's primary desire for food. By learning to temper this basic desire of the body, the practitioner can more readily temper other worldly desires, and thus, become better enabled to draw closer to God in the hope of becoming more Christ-like. Through obedience to the Church and its ascetic practices the Eastern Orthodox Christian seeks to rid himself or herself of the passions (The desires of our fallen carnal nature). All Orthodox Christians are provided with a prescribed set of guidelines. They do not view fasting as a hardship, but rather as a privilege and joy. The teaching of the Church provides both the time and the amount of fasting that is expected as a minimum for every member who chooses to participate. For greater ascesis, some may choose to go without food entirely for a short period of time. A complete three-day fast at the beginning and end of a fasting period is not unusual, and some fast for even longer periods, though this is usually practiced only in monasteries.
In general, fasting means abstaining from meat and meat products, dairy (eggs and cheese) and dairy products, fish, olive oil, and wine. Wine and oil—and, less frequently, fish—are allowed on certain feast days when they happen to fall on a day of fasting; but animal products and dairy are forbidden on fast days, with the exception of "Cheese Fare" week which precedes Great Lent, during which dairy products are allowed. Wine and oil are usually also allowed on Saturdays and Sundays during periods of fast. In some Orthodox traditions, caviar is permitted on Lazarus Saturday, the Saturday before Palm Sunday, although the day is otherwise a fast day. Married couples also abstain from sexual activity on fast days so that they may devote themselves fulsomely to prayer (1 Corinthians 7:5).
While it may seem that fasting in the manner set forth by the Church is a strict rule, there are circumstances where a person's spiritual guide may allow an Economy because of some physical necessity (e.g. those who are pregnant or infirm, the very young and the elderly, or those who have no control over their diet, such as prisoners or soldiers).
The time and type of fast is generally uniform for all Orthodox Christians; the times of fasting are part of the ecclesiastical calendar, and the method of fasting is set by the Holy Canons and Sacred Tradition. There are four major fasting periods during the year:
The Nativity Fast (Advent or "Winter Lent") which is the 40 days preceding the Nativity of Christ (Christmas), beginning on 15 November and running through 24 December.
Great Lent which consists of the 6 weeks (40 Days) preceding Palm Sunday, and Great Week which precedes Easter.
The Apostles' Fast which varies in length from 8 days to 6 weeks. It begins on the Monday following All Saints Sunday and extends to the Feast of Saints Peter and Paul on 29 June.
The Dormition Fast, a two-week-long Fast preceding the Dormition of the Theotokos, lasting from 1 August through 15 August.
In addition to these fasting seasons, Orthodox Christians fast on every Wednesday (in commemoration of Christ's betrayal by Judas Iscariot), and Friday (in commemoration of Christ's Crucifixion) throughout the year. Monastics often fast on Mondays (in imitation of the Angels, who are commemorated on that day in the weekly cycle, since monastics are striving to lead an angelic life on earth, and angels neither eat nor drink).
Orthodox Christians who are preparing to receive the Eucharist do not eat or drink at all from vespers (sunset) until after taking Holy Communion. A similar total fast is expected to be kept on the Eve of Nativity, the Eve of Theophany (Epiphany), Great Friday and Holy Saturday for those who can do so. There are other individual days observed as fasts (though not as days of total fasting) no matter what day of the week they fall on, such as the Beheading of St. John the Baptist on 29 August and the Exaltation of the Holy Cross on 14 September.
Almsgiving
"Almsgiving", more comprehensively described as "acts of mercy", refers to any giving of oneself in charity to someone who has a need, such as material resources, work, assistance, counsel, support, or kindness. Along with prayer and fasting, it is considered a pillar of the personal spiritual practices of the Eastern Orthodox Christian tradition. Almsgiving is particularly important during periods of fasting, when the Eastern Orthodox believer is expected to share with those in need the monetary savings from his or her decreased consumption. As with fasting, mentioning to others one's own virtuous deeds tends to reflect a sinful pride, and may also be considered extremely rude.
Traditions
Monasticism
Saint Catherine's Monastery (6th century), Sinai Peninsula, Egypt
The Eastern Orthodox Church places heavy emphasis and awards a high level of prestige to traditions of monasticism and asceticism with roots in Early Christianity in the Near East and Byzantine Anatolia. The most important centres of Christian Orthodox monasticism are Saint Catherine's Monastery in the Sinai Peninsula (Egypt) and Mount Athos in Northern Greece.
All Orthodox Christians are expected to participate in at least some ascetic works, in response to the commandment of Christ to "come, take up the cross, and follow me." (Mark 10:21 and elsewhere) They are therefore all called to imitate, in one way or another, Christ himself who denied himself to the extent of literally taking up the cross on the way to his voluntary self-sacrifice. However, laypeople are not expected to live in extreme asceticism since this is close to impossible while undertaking the normal responsibilities of worldly life.
Those who wish to do this therefore separate themselves from the world and live as monastics: monks and nuns. As ascetics par excellence, using the allegorical weapons of prayer and fasting in spiritual warfare against their passions, monastics hold a very special and important place in the Church. This kind of life is often seen as incompatible with any kind of worldly activity including that which is normally regarded as virtuous. Social work, school teaching, and other such work is therefore usually left to laypeople. Ascetics of the Eastern Orthodox Church are recognised by their long hair, and in case of male monks, long beards.
Schema worn by monks
There are three main types of monastics. Those who live in monasteries under a common rule are coenobitic. Each monastery may formulate its own rule, and although there are no religious orders in Orthodoxy some respected monastic centers such as Mount Athos are highly influential. Eremitic monks, or hermits, are those who live solitary lives. It is the yearning of many who enter the monastic life to eventually become solitary hermits. This most austere life is only granted to the most advanced monastics and only when their superiors feel they are ready for it.
Hermits are usually associated with a larger monastery but live in seclusion some distance from the main compound. Their local monastery will see to their physical needs, supplying them with simple foods while disturbing them as little as possible. In between are those in semi-eremitic communities, or sketes, where one or two monks share each of a group of nearby dwellings under their own rules and only gather together in the central chapel, or katholikon, for liturgical observances.
The spiritual insight gained from their ascetic struggles make monastics preferred for missionary activity. Bishops are almost always chosen from among monks, and those who are not generally receive the monastic tonsure before their consecrations.
Many (but not all) Orthodox seminaries are attached to monasteries, combining academic preparation for ordination with participation in the community's life of prayer. Monks who have been ordained to the priesthood are called hieromonk (priest-monk); monks who have been ordained to the diaconate are called hierodeacon (deacon-monk). Not all monks live in monasteries, some hieromonks serve as priests in parish churches thus practicing "monasticism in the world".
Cultural practices differ slightly, but in general Father is the correct form of address for monks who have been tonsured, while Novices are addressed as Brother. Similarly, Mother is the correct form of address for nuns who have been tonsured, while Novices are addressed as Sister. Nuns live identical ascetic lives to their male counterparts and are therefore also called monachoi (monastics) or the feminine plural form in Greek, monachai, and their common living space is called a monastery.
Icons and symbols
The "Chi-Rho" symbol, Catacombs of San Callisto, Rome
"IX" (Jesus Christ) monogram from a 4th-century sarcophagus from Constantinople
Easter eggs in front of altar, symbol of Resurrection.
Everything in the Eastern Orthodox Church has a purpose and a meaning revealing God's revelation to man. At the front, or eastern end of the church, is a raised dais with an icon-covered screen or wall (iconostasis or templon) separating the nave from the sanctuary. In the center of this wall is the entrance to the altar known as the "Royal Doors" through which only the clergy may pass.
There is a right and left side door on the front of the iconostasis, one depicting the archangel, Michael and the other Gabriel. The priest and altar boys enter and exit through these doors during appropriate parts of the Divine Liturgy. Immediately to the right of the main gate you will always find an icon of Jesus Christ, on the left, an icon of the Theotokos (Mother of God). Other icons depicted on the iconostasis are Saint John the Forerunner and the Saint after which the church is named.
In front of the iconostasis is the bishop's chair, a place of honor where a visiting bishop or metropolitan will often sit when visiting the church. An Orthodox priest, when standing at the altar during the Divine Liturgy, faces toward the altar (typically facing east) and properly leads his congregation while together they perform the mystical sacrifice and pray to God.
The sanctuary contains the Holy Altar, representing the place where Orthodox Christians believe that Christ was born of the virgin Mary, crucified under Pontius Pilate, laid in the tomb, descended into hell, rose from the dead on the third day, ascended into heaven, and will return again at his second coming. A free-standing cross, bearing the body of Christ, may stand behind the altar. On the altar are a cloth covering, a large book containing the gospel readings performed during services, an ark containing presanctified divine gifts (bread and wine) distributed by the deacon or priest to those who cannot come to the church to receive them, and several white beeswax candles.
Icons
The term 'icon' comes from the Greek word eikon, which simply means image. The Eastern Orthodox believe that the first icons of Christ and the Virgin Mary were painted by Luke the Evangelist. Icons are filled with symbolism designed to convey information about the person or event depicted. For this reason, icons tend to be formulaic, following a prescribed methodology for how a particular person should be depicted, including hair style, body position, clothing, and background details.
Icon painting, in general, is not an opportunity for artistic expression, though each iconographer brings a vision to the piece. It is far more common for an icon to be copied from an older model, though with the recognition of a new saint in the church, a new icon must be created and approved. The personal and creative traditions of Catholic religious art were largely lacking in Orthodox iconography before the 17th century, when Russian iconography began to be strongly influenced by religious paintings and engravings from both Protestant and Roman Catholic Europe. Greek iconography also began to take on a strong western influence for a period and the difference between some Orthodox icons and western religious art began to vanish. More recently there has been a trend of returning to the more traditional and symbolic representations.
Our Lady of St. Theodore (12th century), the protector of Kostroma and patron icon of the Romanov family, following the Byzantine "Tender Mercy" type.
Modern icon depicting Constantine XI Palaiologos, last emperor of the eastern Roman (Byzantine) empire
The style of the icons seems to have been borrowed heavily from the paganism of the Greek culture. Henry Chadwick writes, "In this instinct there was a measure of truth. The representations of Christ as the Almighty Lord on his judgment throne owed something to pictures of Zeus. Portraits of the Mother of God were not wholly independent of a pagan past of venerated mother-goddesses. In the popular mind the saints had come to fill a role that had been played by heroes and deities."[132]
Free-standing statues (three-dimensional depictions) are almost non-existent within the Eastern Orthodox Church. This is partly due to the rejection of the previous pagan Greek age (Greek gods) of idol worship and partly because icons are meant to show the spiritual nature of man, not the sensual earthly body. Bas reliefs, however, became common during the Byzantine period and led to a tradition of covering a painted icon in a silver or gold 'riza' in order to preserve the icon. Such bas relief coverings usually leave the faces and hands of the saints exposed for veneration.
Icons are not considered by the Eastern Orthodox to be idols or objects of worship. The parameters of their usage were clearly spelled out by the 7th ecumenical council. Justification for their usage utilises the following logic: before God took human form in Christ, no material depiction was possible and therefore blasphemous even to contemplate. Once God became incarnate, depiction was possible.
As Christ is believed to be God, it is justified to hold in one's mind the image of God-incarnate. Likewise, when one venerates an icon, it is not the wood or paint that are venerated but rather the individual shown, just as it is not the paper one loves when one might kiss the photograph of a loved one. As Saint Basil famously proclaimed, honour or veneration of the icon always passes to its archetype. Following this reasoning, the veneration of the glorified human saint made in God's image, is always a veneration of the divine image, and hence God as foundational archetype.
Icons can be found adorning the walls of churches and often cover the inside structure completely.[133] Most Orthodox homes have an area set aside for family prayer, usually an eastern facing wall, where are hung many icons. Icons have been part of Orthodox Christianity since the beginning of the church.[134]
Icons are often illuminated by a candle or oil lamp. (Beeswax for candles and olive oil for lamps are preferred because they are natural and burn cleanly.) Besides the practical purpose of making icons visible in an otherwise dark church, both candles and oil lamps symbolise the Light of the World, who is Christ.
Tales of miraculous icons are not uncommon, though it has always been considered that the message of such an event was for the immediate faithful involved and therefore does not usually attract crowds. Some miraculous icons whose reputations span long periods of time nevertheless become objects of pilgrimage along with the places where they are kept. As several Orthodox theologians and saints have explored in the past, the icon's miraculous nature is found not in the material, but in the glory of the saint who is depicted. The icon is a window, in the words of Paul Florensky, that actually participates in the glory of what it represents.
Iconostasis
Iconostasis in the Cathedral of the Annunciation in the Moscow Kremlin.
An iconostasis, also called the templon, is a wall of icons and religious paintings, separating the nave from the sanctuary in a church. Iconostasis also refers to a portable icon stand that can be placed anywhere within a church. The modern iconostasis evolved from the Byzantine templon in the 11th century. The evolution of the iconostasis probably owes a great deal to 14th-century Hesychast mysticism and the wood-carving genius of the Russian Orthodox Church.
The first ceiling-high, five-leveled Russian iconostasis was designed by Andrey Rublyov in the cathedral of the Dormition in Vladimir in 1408. The separation between sanctuary and nave accomplished by the iconostasis is not mandatory, though it is common practice. Depending on circumstance, the role of the iconostasis can be played by masonry, carved panels, screens, curtains, railings, a cord or rope, plain icons on stands, steps, or nothing at all.
Cross
A three-bar cross.
Depictions of the cross within the Eastern Orthodox Church are numerous and often highly ornamented, but its use does not extend to all Orthodox traditions. Some carry special significance. The Tri-Bar Cross, popular in Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus, but common throughout the Eastern Orthodox world, seen to the left, has three bars. Its origins are in the early Byzantine Church of the 4th century AD.
The small top crossbar represents the sign that Pontius Pilate nailed above Christ's head. It often is inscribed with an acronym, "INRI", Latin, meaning "Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews" or "INBI", Greek, "Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews"; however, it is often replaced or amplified by the phrase "The King of Glory" in order to answer Pilate's statement with Christ's affirmation, "My Kingdom is not of this world".
There is also a bottom slanting bar which has several explanations. Claims of evidence indicate that there was a small wooden platform for the crucified to stand on in order to support his weight; in Jesus' case his feet were nailed side by side to this platform with one nail each in order to prolong the torture of the cross.
Implied evidence for this comes mainly from two sources, namely, the Bible (in order to cause the victim to die faster, his legs were broken so they could not support his weight and he would suffocate) and iconography (all early depictions of the crucifixion show this arrangement, not the later with feet on top with single nail). It has also been pointed out by some experts that the nailed hands of a body crucified in the manner often shown in modern secular art would not support the weight of the body and would tear through. A platform for the feet would relieve this problem.
That the bottom bar is slanted has two explanations, to represent the very real agony which Christ experienced on the cross (a refutation of Docetism) and to signify that the thief on Christ's right chose the right path while the thief on the left did not.
Other crosses associated with the Eastern Orthodox Church are the more traditional single-bar crosses, budded designs, the Greek cross, the Latin cross, the Jerusalem cross (cross pattée), Celtic crosses, and others.[135] A common symbolism of the slanted foot stool is The foot-rest points up, toward Heaven, on Christ’s right hand-side, and downward, to Hades, on Christ’s left. "Between two thieves Thy Cross did prove to be a balance of righteousness: wherefore one of them was dragged down to Hades by the weight of his blasphemy [the balance points downward], whereas the other was lightened of his transgressions unto the comprehension of theology [the balance points upward]. O Christ God, glory to Thee."[136] Another Orthodox cross which is worn in gold is an outer budded cross with an inner Three Bar Cross. The inscription Jesus Christ in Greek: IC (Iesous) on the left side bar and XC (Xhristos) on the right side bar, with a sun on the top of the cross. There is also typically an inscription on the back in Church Slavonic: "спаси и сохрани", "Spasi i Sokhrani", "Save and Protect". This cross is known as the Saint Olga Cross.[137]
Art and architecture
An illustration of the traditional interior of an Orthodox church.
The church building has many symbolic meanings; perhaps the oldest and most prominent is the concept that the Church is the Ark (as in Noah's) in which the world is saved from the flood of temptations; therefore, most Orthodox Churches are rectangular in design. Another popular configuration, especially for churches with large choirs is cruciform or cross-shaped or what is called the "Greek-cross."
Architectural patterns vary in shape and complexity, with chapels sometimes added around the main church, or triple altars; but in general, the symbolic layout of the church remains the same. Each church is created with specified qualifications based on what the apostles said in the Bible. These qualifications include how big the temple should be.
Interior of Agios Minas Cathedral, Heraklion
The Church building is divided into three main parts: the narthex (vestibule), the nave and the sanctuary (also called the altar or holy place). The narthex is where catechumens and non-Orthodox visitors were traditionally asked to stand during services. It is separated from the nave by "The Royal Gate". On each side of this gate are candle stands (menalia) representing the pillars of fire that went before the Hebrew people escaping from Egypt.
The nave is where most of the congregation stand during services. Traditionally, men stand on the right and women on the left. This is for a number of reasons: (1) Considering the family unit of past centuries the husband was dominant; thus, standing the same distance from the altar, equality is emphasised. (2) The idea of separating the sexes was inherited from the Jewish tradition of doing so within synagogues (3) Separation of sexes also followed the practice of choirs in which different levels of voice are placed in groups to facilitate harmony.
In general, men and women dress respectfully, typically wearing their "Sunday best" to enter the church. Often, women cover their heads as prescribed by Paul (1 Cor. 11:13). Children are considered full members of the Church and stand attentively and quietly during services. There is often a choir area at the side or in a loft in back. In addition to the Choir, a Chanter is always present at the front of the church to chant responses and hymns that are part of the Divine Liturgy offered by the Priest. There is usually a dome in the ceiling with an icon of Christ depicted as Ruler of the Universe (Pantocrator).
The Archdiocesan Cathedral of the Holy Trinity on New York City's Upper East Side is the largest Orthodox Christian church in the Western Hemisphere.[138]
Apart from the icons, the Eastern Orthodox churches and monasteries are often decorated with frescos and mosaics.
Local customs
Shards of pottery vases on the street, after being thrown from the windows of nearby houses. A Holy Saturday tradition in Corfu.
The Eastern Orthodox Church also has many associated traditions (sometimes referred to simply as customs), compatible with its life and function, but not necessarily tied so closely to the faith itself. These are not generally regarded as a part of Holy Tradition, though no strict dividing line is drawn. As long as compatibility is maintained, general practice often tends to the permissive rather than the restrictive, with the local priest or bishop resolving questions.
Many of these customs are local or cultural, and some are not even especially religious, but form a part of the church's relationship with the people in the time and place where it exists. Where outside customs affect church practices such as worship, a closer watch is kept for guarding the integrity of worship, but suitable local differences are welcomed and celebrated joyfully. The local church customs, especially liturgical ones, are referred to as differences in typica (Style).
Locality is also expressed in regional terms of churchly jurisdiction, which is often also drawn along national lines. Many Orthodox churches adopt a national title (e.g. Albanian Orthodox, Bulgarian Orthodox, Antiochian Orthodox, Georgian Orthodox, Greek Orthodox, Montenegrin Orthodox, Romanian Orthodox, Russian Orthodox, Serbian Orthodox, Ukrainian Orthodox, etc.) and this title can identify which language is used in services, which bishops preside, and which of the typica is followed by specific congregations. In the Middle East, Orthodox Christians are usually referred to as Rum ("Roman") Orthodox, because of their historical connection with the Eastern Roman (Byzantine) Empire.[139]
Differences in praxis ("practice") tend to be slight, involving things such as the order in which a particular set of hymns are sung or what time a particular service is celebrated. But observances of the saints' days of local saints are more often celebrated in special services within a locality, as are certain national holidays, like Greek Independence Day. In North America, observances of Thanksgiving Day are increasing.
Members of the Church are fully united in faith and the Sacred Mysteries with all Orthodox congregations, regardless of nationality or location. In general, Orthodox Christians could travel the globe and feel familiar with the services even if they did not know the language being used.
In the Levant, Christian Orthodox services and identity often combine both the Byzantine Greek and indigenous (Arabic and Aramaic) traditions. Other Orthodox communities can identify with two Eastern Orthodox churches simultaneously, for example Caucasus Greeks and Pontic Greeks in Russia often identify with both the Greek Orthodox Church and Russian Orthodox Church, as a result of centuries of assimilation and intermarriage with ethnic Russians and other Christian Orthodox communities in mainly southern Russia.
Holy mysteries (sacraments)
According to Orthodox theology, the purpose of the Christian life is to attain theosis, the mystical union of mankind with God. This union is understood as both collective and individual. St. Athanasius of Alexandria wrote concerning the Incarnation that, "He (Jesus) was made man that we might be made god (θεοποιηθῶμεν)."[140] See 2 Peter 1:4, John 10:34–36, Psalm 82:6. The entire life of the church is oriented towards making this possible and facilitating it.
In the Eastern Orthodox Church the terms "mystery" or "the mysteries" refer to the process of theosis. While it is understood that God theoretically can do anything instantly and invisibly, it is also understood that he generally chooses to use material substance as a medium in order to reach people. The limitations are those of mankind, not God. Matter is not considered to be evil by the Eastern Orthodox. Water, oil, bread, wine, etc., all are means by which God reaches out to allow people to draw closer to him. How this process works is a "mystery" and cannot be defined in human terms. These mysteries are surrounded by prayer and symbolism so that their true meaning will not be forgotten.
Those things which in the West are often termed sacraments or sacramentals are known among the Eastern Orthodox as the "sacred mysteries". While the Roman Catholic Church numbers seven sacraments, and many Protestant groups list two (Baptism and the Eucharist) or even none, the Eastern Orthodox do not limit the number. However, for the sake of convenience, catechisms will often speak of the seven Great Mysteries. Among these are Holy Communion (the most direct connection), Baptism, Chrismation, Confession, Unction, Matrimony, and Ordination. But the term also properly applies to other sacred actions such as monastic tonsure or the blessing of holy water, and involves fasting, almsgiving, or an act as simple as lighting a candle, burning incense, praying or asking God's blessing on food.[141]
Baptism
An Orthodox baptism
Baptism is the mystery which transforms the old and sinful person into a new and pure one; the old life, the sins, any mistakes made are gone and a clean slate is given. Through Baptism a person is united to the Body of Christ by becoming a member of the Orthodox Church. During the service, water is blessed. The catechumen is fully immersed in the water three times in the name of the Holy Trinity. This is considered to be a death of the "old man" by participation in the crucifixion and burial of Christ, and a rebirth into new life in Christ by participation in his resurrection.[142] Properly a new name is given, which becomes the person's name.
Children of Orthodox families are normally baptized shortly after birth. Converts to Orthodoxy are usually formally baptized into the Orthodox Church, though exceptions are sometimes made. Those who have left Orthodoxy and adopted a new religion, if they return to their Orthodox roots, are usually received back into the church through the mystery of Chrismation.
Properly, the mystery of Baptism is administered by bishops and priests; however, in emergencies any Orthodox Christian can baptize.[143] In such cases, should the person survive the emergency, it is likely that the person will be properly baptized by a priest at some later date. This is not considered to be a second baptism, nor is it imagined that the person is not already Orthodox, but rather it is a fulfillment of the proper form.
The service of Baptism used in Orthodox churches has remained largely unchanged for over 1500 years. This fact is witnessed to by St. Cyril of Jerusalem (d. 386), who, in his Discourse on the Sacrament of Baptism, describes the service in much the same way as is currently in use.
Chrismation
Chrismation (sometimes called confirmation[144]) is the mystery by which a baptized person is granted the gift of the Holy Spirit through anointing with Holy Chrism.[145] It is normally given immediately after baptism as part of the same service, but is also used to receive lapsed members of the Orthodox Church.[146] As baptism is a person's participation in the death and resurrection of Christ, so Chrismation is a person's participation in the coming of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost.[147]
A baptized and chrismated Orthodox Christian is a full member of the Church and may receive the Eucharist regardless of age.[147]
The creation of chrism may be accomplished by any bishop at any time, but usually is done only once a year, often when a synod of bishops convenes for its annual meeting. (Some autocephalous churches get their chrism from others.) Anointing with it substitutes for the laying-on of hands described in the New Testament, even when an instrument such as a brush is used.[148]
Holy Communion (Eucharist)
Eucharistic elements prepared for the Divine Liturgy
An icon of Holy Communion: "Receive the Body of Christ; taste the Fountain of Immortality."
The Eucharist is at the center of Orthodox Christianity. In practice, it is the partaking of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ in the midst of the Divine Liturgy with the rest of the church. The bread and wine are believed to become the genuine Body and Blood of the Christ Jesus through the operation of the Holy Spirit. The Orthodox Church has never described exactly how this occurs, or gone into the detail that the Roman Catholic Church has in the West.
Communion is given only to baptized and chrismated Orthodox Christians who have prepared by fasting, prayer and confession. The priest will administer the gifts with a spoon, called a "cochlear", directly into the recipient's mouth from the chalice.[149] From baptism young infants and children are carried to the chalice to receive holy communion.[147]
Because of the Orthodox understanding of mankind's fallen nature in general those who wish to commune prepare themselves in a way that reflects mankind in paradise. First, they prepare by having their confession heard and the prayer of repentance read over them by a priest. They will increase their prayer rule, adding the prescribed prayers in preparation for communing. Finally, they will fast completely from food and drink from the evening of the previous day (usually sunset on Saturday if communing on Sunday).
Repentance (Confession)
Orthodox Christians who have committed sins but repent of them, and who wish to reconcile themselves to God and renew the purity of their original baptisms, confess their sins to God before a spiritual guide who offers advice and direction to assist the individual in overcoming their sin. Parish priests commonly function as spiritual guides, but such guides can be any person, male or female, who has been given a blessing to hear confessions. Spiritual guides are chosen very carefully as this is a mandate that once chosen must be obeyed. Having confessed, the penitent then has his or her parish priest read the prayer of repentance over them.
Sin is not viewed by the Orthodox as a stain on the soul that needs to be wiped out, or a legal transgression that must be set right by a punitive sentence, but rather as a mistake made by the individual with the opportunity for spiritual growth and development. An act of Penance (epitemia), if the spiritual guide requires it, is never formulaic, but rather is directed toward the individual and their particular problem, as a means of establishing a deeper understanding of the mistake made, and how to effect its cure. Because full participatory membership is granted to infants, it is not unusual for even small children to confess; though the scope of their culpability is far less than an older child, still their opportunity for spiritual growth remains the same.
Marriage
The wedding of Tsar Nicholas II of Russia.
From the Orthodox perspective, marriage is one of the holy mysteries or sacraments. As well as in many other Christian traditions, for example in Roman Catholicism, it serves to unite a woman and a man in eternal union and love before God, with the purpose of following Christ and His Gospel and raising up a faithful, holy family through their holy union.[150][151] The church understands marriage to be the union of one man and one woman, and certain Orthodox leaders have spoken out strongly in opposition to the civil institution of same-sex marriage.[152][153]
Jesus said that "when they rise from the dead, they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are like angels in heaven" (Mk 12:25). For the Orthodox Christian this passage should not be understood to imply that Christian marriage will not remain a reality in the Kingdom, but points to the fact that relations will not be "fleshy", but "spiritual".[154] Love between wife and husband, as an icon of relationship between Christ and Church, is eternal.[155]
The Church does recognize that there are rare occasions when it is better that couples do separate, but there is no official recognition of civil divorces. For the Orthodox, to say that marriage is indissoluble means that it should not be broken, the violation of such a union, perceived as holy, being an offense resulting from either adultery or the prolonged absence of one of the partners. Thus, permitting remarriage is an act of compassion of the Church towards sinful man.[156] Ecclesiastically divorced Orthodox (not civilly divorced only) are usually allowed to remarry in the Orthodox Church, though there is usually imposed on them a fairly severe penance by their bishop and the services for a second marriage in this case are more penitential than joyful. Widows are permitted to remarry without repercussion and their second marriage is considered just as valid as the first. One exception to this rule is the clergy and their wives. Should a married priest die, it is normal that his wife will retire to a monastery once their children are out of the house. Widowed priests are not allowed to remarry (no priest may be married after his ordination) and also frequently end up in monasteries.
The service of Marriage in the Orthodox Church has two distinct parts: the Betrothal and the Crowning. There is no exchange of vows. There is a set expectation of the obligations incumbent on a married couple, and whatever promises they may have privately to each other are their responsibility to keep.
Holy Orders
Clergy at All Saints' Antiochian Orthodox Church, Raleigh, United States (L to R): priest, two deacons, bishop.
Since its founding, the Church spread to different places and its leaders in each region came to be known as episkopoi (overseers, plural of episkopos, overseer—Gr. ἐπίσκοπος), which became "bishop" in English. The other ordained roles are presbyter (Gr. πρεσβύτερος, elder), which became "prester" and then "priest" in English, and diakonos (Gr. διάκονος, servant), which became "deacon" in English (see also subdeacon). There are numerous administrative positions among the clergy that carry additional titles.
In the Greek tradition, bishops who occupy an ancient see are called metropolitans, while the lead bishop in Greece is the archbishop. (In the Russian tradition, however, the usage of the terms "metropolitan" and "archbishop" is reversed.) Priests can be archpriests, archimandrites or protopresbyters. Deacons can also be archdeacons or protodeacons. The position of deacon is often occupied for life. The deacon also acts as an assistant to a bishop.
With the exception of bishops, who remain celibate, the Orthodox Church has always allowed priests and deacons to be married, provided the marriage takes place before ordination. In general it is considered preferable for parish priests to be married as they often act as counsel to married couples and thus can draw on their own experience. Unmarried priests usually are monks and live in monasteries, though there are occasions when, because of a lack of married priests, a monk-priest is temporarily assigned to a parish.
Widowed priests and deacons may not remarry and it is common for such members of the clergy to retire to a monastery (see clerical celibacy). This is also true of widowed wives of clergy, who do not remarry and become nuns when their children are grown. Only men are allowed to take holy orders, although deaconesses had both liturgical and pastoral functions within the church.[157] However, it has fallen out of practice (the last deaconess was ordained in the 19th century).
In 2017, Patriarch Theodoros II and the Holy Synod of the Patriarchate of Alexandria decided to reinstate the order of deaconesses in the Greek Orthodox Church. In February, he appointed six nuns to be subdeacons within the church. (Catherine Clark (2017). "National Catholic Reporter." March-April 6, 2017. p. 7 )
Unction
Anointing with oil, often called "unction", is one of the mysteries administered by the Orthodox Church and it is not reserved only for the dying or terminally ill, but for all in need of spiritual or bodily healing. In Greece, during the Ottoman occupation, it became the custom to administer this mystery annually on Great Wednesday to all believers; in recent decades, this custom has spread to many other locations. It is often distributed on major feast days, or any time the clergy feel it necessary for the spiritual welfare of its congregation.
According to Orthodox teaching unction is based on the Epistle of James:
Is anyone among you sick? Let him call for the elders of the church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord. And the prayer of faith will save the sick, and the Lord will raise him up. And if he has committed sins, he will be forgiven.—James 5:14–15
History
Early Church
An early Christian "Ichthys" (fish) inscription from ancient Ephesus
Following Jesus Christ's Great Commission to the apostles, Christianity spread rapidly throughout the Roman Empire. Paul and the Apostles traveled extensively throughout the Empire, including Asia Minor, establishing Churches in major communities, with the first Churches appearing in Jerusalem and the Holy Land, then in Antioch, Ethiopia, Egypt, Rome, Alexandria, Athens, Thessalonica, Illyricum, and Byzantium, which centuries later would become prominent as the New Rome.[158] Christianity in the Roman Empire met with considerable resistance, as its adherents would refuse to comply with the Roman state (even at the threat of death) in offering sacrifice to the pagan gods. Despite persecutions, the Church spread. The persecution dissipated upon the conversion of Emperor Constantine I in 324 AD.[158]
By the 4th century Christianity had spread to numerous regions. A number of influential schools of thought had arisen, particularly the Alexandrian and Antiochian philosophical approaches. Other groups, such as the Arians, had also managed to gain influence. However, their positions caused theological conflicts within the Church, thus prompting the Emperor Constantine to call for a great ecumenical synod in order to define the Church's position against the growing, often widely diverging, philosophical and theological interpretations of Christianity. He made it possible for this council to meet not only by providing a location, but by offering to pay for the transportation of all the existing bishops of the Church. Most modern Christian Churches regard this synod, commonly called the First Council of Nicaea or more generally the First Ecumenical Council,[158][159] as of major importance.
Ecumenical councils
Icon depicting the Emperor Constantine and the bishops of the First Council of Nicaea (325) holding the Niceno–Constantinopolitan Creed of 381.
Several doctrinal disputes from the 4th century onwards led to the calling of Ecumenical councils. In the Orthodox Church, an Ecumenical council is the supreme authority that can be invoked to resolve contested issues of the faith. As such, these councils have been held to resolve the most important theological matters that came to be disputed within the Church. Many lesser disagreements were resolved through local councils in the areas where they arose, before they grew significant enough to require an Ecumenical council.
There are seven councils authoritatively recognised as Ecumenical:
The First Ecumenical Council was convoked by the Roman Emperor Constantine at Nicaea in 325 and presided over by the Patriarch Alexander of Alexandria, with over 300 bishops condemning the view of Arius that the Son is a created being inferior to the Father.[160]
The Second Ecumenical Council was held at Constantinople in 381, presided over by the Patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch, with 150 bishops, defining the nature of the Holy Spirit against those asserting His inequality with the other persons of the Trinity.[161]
The Third Ecumenical Council is that of Ephesus in 431, presided over by the Patriarch of Alexandria, with 250 bishops, which affirmed that Mary is truly "Birthgiver" or "Mother" of God (Theotokos), contrary to the teachings of Nestorius.[162]
The Fourth Ecumenical Council is that of Chalcedon in 451, Patriarch of Constantinople presiding, 500 bishops, affirmed that Jesus is truly God and truly man, without mixture of the two natures, contrary to Monophysite teaching.[163]
The Fifth Ecumenical Council is the second of Constantinople in 553, interpreting the decrees of Chalcedon and further explaining the relationship of the two natures of Jesus; it also condemned the alleged teachings of Origen on the pre-existence of the soul, etc.[164]
The Sixth Ecumenical Council is the third of Constantinople in 681; it declared that Christ has two wills of his two natures, human and divine, contrary to the teachings of the Monothelites.[165]
The Seventh Ecumenical Council was called under the Empress Regent Irene of Athens in 787, known as the second of Nicaea. It supports the veneration of icons while forbidding their worship. It is often referred to as "The Triumph of Orthodoxy".[166]
There are also two other councils which are considered Ecumenical by some Orthodox. All Orthodox agree that the decisions of these further councils are valid; the disagreement is only whether they carry sufficient importance to be considered truly Ecumenical:
8. The Fourth Council of Constantinople was called in 879. It restored St. Photius to his See in Constantinople and condemned any alteration of the Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed of 381.
4
9. The Fifth Council of Constantinople was actually a series of councils held between 1341 and 1351. It affirmed the hesychastic theology of St. Gregory Palamas and condemned the philosopher Barlaam of Calabria.
In addition to these councils there have been a number of other significant councils meant to further define the Orthodox position. They are the Synods of Constantinople, in 1484, 1583, 1755, 1819, and 1872, the Synod of Jassy (Iași) in 1642, and the Pan-Orthodox Synod of Jerusalem in 1672. Another council convened in June 2016 to discuss many modern phenomena including Modernism, other Christian confessions, Orthodoxy's relation with other religions and fasting disciplines.[167]
Roman/Byzantine Empire
Hagia Sophia, the largest church in the world and patriarchal basilica of Constantinople for nearly a thousand years, later converted into a mosque, now a museum
Eastern Christian culture reached its golden age during the high point of the Byzantine Empire and continued to flourish in Ukraine and Russia, after the fall of Constantinople. Numerous autocephalous churches were established in Europe: Russia, Greece, Georgia and Ukraine, as well as Asia.
In the 530s the Church of the Holy Wisdom (Hagia Sophia) was built in Constantinople under Emperor Justinian I.[168]
Early schisms
The Church in Egypt (Patriarchate of Alexandria) split into two groups following the Council of Chalcedon (451), over a dispute about the relation between the divine and human natures of Jesus. Eventually this led to each group anathematizing the other. Those that remained in communion with the other patriarchs (by accepting the Council of Chalcedon) are known today as the Greek Orthodox Church of Alexandria, where the adjective "Greek" refers to their ties to the Greek-speaking culture of the Byzantine Empire. However, those who disagreed with the findings of the Council of Chalcedon were the majority in Egypt, and today they are known as the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria, having maintained a separate patriarchate. The Coptic Orthodox Church is currently the largest Christian church in Egypt and in the whole Middle East. There was also a similar, albeit smaller scale, split in Syria (Patriarchate of Antioch), which resulted in the separation of the Syriac Orthodox Church from the Byzantine Patriarchate of Antioch.
Those who disagreed with the Council of Chalcedon are sometimes called "Oriental Orthodox" to distinguish them from the "Eastern Orthodox", who accepted the Council of Chalcedon. Oriental Orthodox are also sometimes referred to as "non-Chalcedonians", or "anti-Chalcedonians". The Oriental Orthodox Church denies that it is monophysite and prefers the term "miaphysite", to denote the "united" nature of Jesus (two natures united into one) consistent with St. Cyril's theology: "The term union...signifies the concurrence in one reality of those things which are understood to be united" and "the Word who is ineffably united with it in a manner beyond all description" (St. Cyril of Alexandria - On the Unity of Christ). Both the Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox churches formally believe themselves to be the continuation of the true church, although over the last several decades there has been considerable reconciliation and the prospect of reunification has been discussed.
As well, there are the "Nestorian" churches, which are Eastern Christian churches that keep the faith of only the first two ecumenical councils, i.e., the First Council of Nicaea and the First Council of Constantinople. "Nestorian" is an outsider's term for a tradition that predated the influence of Nestorius, the origin of which might lay in certain sections of the School of Antioch or via Nestorius' teacher(s) Theodore of Mopsuestia and/or Diodore of Tarsus. The "Nestorian Church" is commonly referred to as "the Assyrian Church" or fully as the Assyrian Church of the East.
Conversion of East and South Slavs
In the 9th and 10th centuries, Christianity made great inroads into pagan Europe, including Kievan Rus'. This work was made possible by the work of the Byzantine-era saints Cyril and Methodius. When king Rastislav of Moravia asked Byzantium for teachers who could minister to the Moravians in their own language, Byzantine emperor Michael III chose these two brothers. Cyril and Methodius translated the Bible and many of the prayer books. As the translations prepared by them were copied by speakers of other dialects, the hybrid literary language Old Church Slavonic was created. Originally sent to convert the Slavs of Great Moravia, Cyril and Methodius were forced to compete with Frankish missionaries from the Roman diocese. Their disciples were driven out of Great Moravia in AD 886.[169]
The baptism of Princess Olga in Constantinople, a miniature from the Radzivill Chronicle
Some of the disciples, namely Saint Clement of Ohrid and Saint Naum, were of great importance to the Orthodox Faith in Bulgaria. In a short time, the disciples of Cyril and Methodius managed to prepare and instruct the future Bulgarian clergy into the biblical texts and in AD 893, proclaimed the first organized Church on the Balkan Peninsula. The success of the conversion of the Bulgarians facilitated the conversion of East Slavic peoples, most notably the Rus', predecessors of Belarusians, Russians, and Ukrainians.[170]
The work of the Thessaloniki brothers Cyril and Methodius and their disciples had a major impact to Serbs as well.[171] However, they accepted Christianity collectively by families and by tribes (in the process between the 7th and the 9th century). In commemoration of their baptisms, each Serbian family or tribe began to celebrate an exclusively Serbian custom called Slava (patron saint) in a special way to honor the Saint on whose day they received the sacrament of Holy Baptism. It is the most solemn day of the year for all Serbs of the Orthodox faith and has played a role of vital importance in the history of the Serbian people. Slava is actually the celebration of the spiritual birthday of the Serbian people which the Church blessed and proclaimed it a Church institution.[172]
The missionaries to the East and South Slavs had great success in part because they used the people's native language rather than Greek, the predominant language of the Byzantine Empire or Latin as the Roman priests did.[173] Today the Russian Orthodox Church is the largest of the Orthodox Churches followed by the Romanian Orthodox Church.[174]
Great Schism (1054)
In the 11th century what was recognised as the Great Schism took place between Rome and Constantinople, which led to separation between the Church of the West, the Roman Catholic Church, and the Eastern Byzantine Churches, now the Orthodox. There were doctrinal issues like the filioque clause and the authority of the Roman Pope involved in the split, but these were greatly exacerbated by political factors of both Church and state, and by cultural and linguistic differences between Latins and Greeks. Regarding Papal supremacy, the Eastern half grew disillusioned with the Pope's centralization of power, as well as his blatant attempts of excluding the Eastern half in regard to Papacy approvals. It used to be that the Emperor would at least have say when a new Pope would be elected, but towards the high Middle Ages, the Christians in Rome were slowly consolidating power and removing Byzantine influence. However, even before this exclusionary tendency from the West, well before 1054, the Eastern and Western halves of the Church were in perpetual conflict, particularly during the periods of Eastern iconoclasm and the Photian schism.[175]
Latin Crusaders sacking the city of Constantinople, the capital of the Eastern Orthodox controlled Byzantine Empire, in 1204.
The final breach is often considered to have arisen after the capture and sacking of Constantinople by the Fourth Crusade in 1204; the final break with Rome occurred circa 1450. The sacking of Church of Holy Wisdom and establishment of the Latin Empire as a seeming attempt to supplant the Orthodox Byzantine Empire in 1204 is viewed with some rancour to the present day. In 2004, Pope John Paul II extended a formal apology for the sacking of Constantinople in 1204, which was importantly also strongly condemned by the Pope at the time (Innocent III, see reference at end of paragraph); the apology was formally accepted by Patriarch Bartholomew of Constantinople. Many things that were stolen during this time —holy relics, riches, and many other items—were not returned and are still held in various European cities, particularly Venice.[176][177]
Reunion was attempted twice, at the 1274 Second Council of Lyon and the 1439 Council of Florence. The Council of Florence briefly reestablished communion between East and West, which lasted until after the fall of Constantinople in 1453. In each case, however, the councils were rejected by the Orthodox people as a whole, and the union of Florence also became very politically difficult after Constantinople came under Ottoman rule. Some local Eastern Churches have, however, renewed union with Rome in time since (see Eastern Catholic Churches). Recent decades have seen a renewal of ecumenical spirit and dialogue between the Churches.[178]
Greek Church under Ottoman rule
In 1453, the Byzantine Empire fell to the Ottoman Empire. By this time Egypt had been under Muslim control for some seven centuries, but Orthodoxy was very strong in Russia which had recently acquired an autocephalous status; and thus Moscow called itself the Third Rome, as the cultural heir of Constantinople.
Under Ottoman rule, the Greek Orthodox Church acquired substantial power as an autonomous millet. The ecumenical patriarch was the religious and administrative ruler of the Rûm (Ottoman administrative unit meaning "Roman"), which encompassed all the Orthodox subjects of the Empire.
Russian Orthodox Church in the Russian Empire
Up until 1666, when Patriarch Nikon was deposed by the tsar, the Russian Orthodox Church had been independent of the State.[179] In 1721 the first Russian Emperor, Peter I abolished completely the patriarchate and so the Church effectively became a department of the government, ruled by a Most Holy Synod composed of senior bishops and lay bureaucrats appointed by the Emperor himself. From 1721 until the Bolsheviks' October Revolution of 1917, the Russian Orthodox Church was essentially transformed into a governmental agency, a tool used to various degrees by the tsars in the imperial campaigns of Russification. The Church was allowed by the State to levy taxes on the peasants. Therefore, the Church, along with the imperial regime, to which it belonged, came to be presented as an enemy of the people by the Bolsheviks and the other Russian revolutionaries.[180]
Orthodox churches under Communist rule
A church being dynamited
1931 demolition of the Cathedral of Christ the Saviour in Moscow
Large church
The rebuilt Cathedral of Christ the Saviour, currently the tallest Orthodox church
After the October revolution of 1917, part of the clergy of the Russian Church escaped the Bolshevik persecutions by fleeing abroad, where they founded an independent church in exile, reunified with the Russian one in 2007. The Orthodox Church clergy in Russia were seen as sympathetic with the cause of the White Army in the Civil War after the Revolution, and occasionally collaborated with it; Patriarch Tikhon's declared position was vehemently anti-Bolshevik in 1918. This may have further strengthened the Bolshevik animus against the church. The Soviet government confiscated church property, ridiculed religion, harassed believers, and propagated atheism in schools. Actions toward particular religions, however, were determined by State interests, and most organized religions were never outlawed. Some actions against Orthodox priests and believers along with execution included torture, being sent to prison camps, labour camps or mental hospitals.[181][182] In the first five years after the Bolshevik revolution, 28 bishops and 1,200 priests were executed.[183]
After Nazi Germany's attack on the Soviet Union in 1941, Joseph Stalin revived the Russian Orthodox Church to intensify patriotic support for the war effort. By 1957 about 22,000 Russian Orthodox churches had become active. But in 1959 Nikita Khrushchev initiated his own campaign against the Russian Orthodox Church and forced the closure of about 12,000 churches. It is estimated that 50,000 clergy had been executed between the revolution and the end of the Khrushchev era. Members of the church hierarchy were jailed or forced out, their places taken by docile clergy, many of whom had ties with the KGB. By 1985 fewer than 7,000 churches remained active.[183]
However, there is definitely marked return to Christian Orthodoxy in Russia. According to the Pew Research Religion & Public Life Project, between 1991 and 2008, the share of Russian adults identifying as Orthodox Christian rose from 31 percent to 72 percent, according to a new Pew Research Center analysis of three waves of data (1991, 1998 and 2008) from the International Social Survey Programme (ISSP) – a collaboration involving social scientists in about 50 countries.[184]
Albania was the only state to have declared itself officially fully atheist.[185] In some other Communist states such as Romania, the Romanian Orthodox Church as an organization enjoyed relative freedom and even prospered, albeit under strict secret police control. That, however, did not rule out demolishing churches and monasteries as part of broader systematization (urban planning), and state persecution of individual believers. As an example of the latter, Romania stands out as a country which ran a specialized institution where many Orthodox (along with people of other faiths) were subjected to psychological punishment or torture and mind control experimentation in order to force them give up their religious convictions. However, this was only supported by one faction within the regime, and lasted only three years. The Communist authorities closed down the prison in 1952, and punished many of those responsible for abuses (twenty of them were sentenced to death).[186][187]
Relations with other Christians
The consecration of the Rt Rev. Reginald Heber Weller as an Anglican bishop at the Cathedral of St. Paul the Apostle in the Episcopal Diocese of Fond du Lac, with the Rt. Rev. Anthony Kozlowski of the Polish National Catholic Church and Saint Tikhon, then Bishop of the Aleutians and Alaska (along with his chaplains Fr. John Kochurov and Fr. Sebastian Dabovich) of the Russian Orthodox Church present
Pope Francis and Patriarch Bartholomew I in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, Jerusalem, 2014
Eastern Orthodoxy represents the majority of Eastern Christianity. The Orthodox trace their bishops back to the apostles through apostolic succession, and continue the ancient Christian practices of veneration of saints, especially Mary the Mother of God as the Theotokos, prayers for the dead, and monasticism. Orthodoxy does not openly promote statuary, although it is not expressly condemned, instead limiting itself primarily to two-dimensional iconography. Western theological concepts of original sin, substitutionary atonement, predestination, purgatory and particular judgment are generally rejected by traditional Orthodox theologians.
The Orthodox believe themselves to be the One Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church; that is, the true Church established by Jesus Christ and placed into the care of the apostles. As almost all other Christian groups are in indirect schism with the Orthodox Church, mostly as a result of the Great Schism with the Roman Catholic Church at the turn of the second Christian millennium (before the schisms of the Protestant Reformation), these other groups are viewed as being Christian, but who, to varying degrees, lack full theological orthodoxy and orthopraxy. As such, all groups outside of the Orthodox Church are not seen as being members of the Church proper, but rather separated brethren who have failed to retain the fullness of the Christian faith and theology. These deviations from orthodoxy have traditionally been called heresy, but due to the term's perceived pejorative connotations, some prefer the more technical designation of the term heterodoxy.
In 1920, the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople, published an encyclical "addressed 'To all the Churches of Christ, wherever they may be', urging closer co-operation among separated Christians, and suggesting a 'League of Churches', parallel to the newly founded League of Nations".[188] This gesture was instrumental in the foundation of the World Council of Churches (WCC);[189] as such, almost all Eastern Orthodox Churches are members of the WCC and "Orthodox ecclesiastics and theologians serve on its committees".[190] Kallistos Ware, a British metropolitan bishop of the Orthodox Church, has stated that ecumenism "is important for Orthodoxy: it has helped to force the various Orthodox Churches out of their comparative isolation, making them meet one another and enter into a living contact with non-Orthodox Christians."[191]
Hilarion Alfeyev, Metropolitan of Volokolamsk and head of external relations for the Moscow Patriarchate of the Russian Orthodox Church, stated that Orthodox and Evangelical Protestant Christians share the same positions on "such issues as abortion, the family, and marriage" and desire "vigorous grassroots engagement" between the two Christian communions on such issues.[192]
In that regard, the differences between the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox communions have not been improved in any relevant way. Dogmatic and liturgical polarities have been significant, even and especially in recent times. A pertinent point of contention between the monarchically papal, administratively centralized Roman Catholic Church and the decentralized confederation of Orthodox Churches is the theological significance of the Virgin Mary (Theotokos, or "God-bearer").[193] Even during a visit by Pope Francis to Georgia in October 2016, the leader of the Roman Catholics was snubbed by most Orthodox Christians when he was holding mass in front of the practically empty Mikheil Meskhi Stadium in Tbilisi.[194]
The Oriental Orthodox Churches are not in communion with the Eastern Orthodox Church, despite their similar names. Slow dialogue towards restoring communion between the two churches began in the mid-20th century;[195] also, notably, in the 19th century, when the Greek Patriarch in Egypt had to absent himself from the country for a long period of time, he left his church under the guidance of the Coptic Pope Cyril IV of Alexandria.[196]
Relations with Islam
The Constantinople Massacre of April 1821: a religious persecution of the Greek population of Constantinople under the Ottomans. Patriarch Gregory V of Constantinople was executed.
Historically, the Orthodox Church and the non-Chalcedonians were among the first peoples to have contact with Islam, which conquered Roman/Byzantine Syria-Palestine and Egypt in the 7th century, and fought many battles against Islamic conquests. The Qur'an itself records its concurrent observations regarding the Roman world in Surah al-Rum. The main contact with Islam however, came after the conquest of the Seljuk Turks of Roman/Byzantine Anatolia in the 13th century. Until the turn of the 20th century, the Orthodox Church was under the authority of various Islamic Sultanates and Caliphates until the anti-Colonialist surge that began in the early 20th century.
Christians who were under Islamic rule were denied equality of rights and forced to pay the Jizya poll tax.[197]
In Russia, Metropolitan Alfeyev stated belief in the possibility of peaceful coexistence between Islam and Christianity as the two religions have never had religious wars in Russia.[198]
Present
The various autocephalous and autonomous synods of the Orthodox Church are distinct in terms of administration and local culture, but for the most part exist in full communion with one another.
Presently, there are two communions that reject each other and, in addition, some schismatic churches not in any communion, all three groups identifying as Eastern Orthodox. The main traditional historical communion is divided into two groups - those who use the Revised Julian calendar for calculating fixed feasts and the Julian calendar for calculating movable feasts, and those who use the Julian calendar for all purposes. This second group may include congregations whose church allows them to choose, with the proviso that the choice remains in effect at least until the end of the church year. Also in communion are the Estonian and Finnish Orthodox churches who have a dispensation to use the Gregorian calendar for all purposes. Another group are referred to as True Orthodoxy (also Old Calendarists), they are those who, without authority from their parent churches, have continued to use the old Julian calendar, claiming that the calendar reform in the 1920s is in contravention of the ecumenical councils. Similarly, another group called Old Believers, separated in 1666 from the official Russian Orthodox Church as a protest against church rite reforms introduced by Patriarch Nikon of Moscow. As Eastern Orthodox Christianity is both collegial and local in structure, there is no single organization called the "True Orthodox Church" nor is there official recognition among the "True Orthodox" as to who is properly included among them. While some unions have taken place even up to the present, the majority of True Orthodox are only secondarily concerned with reunion as opposed to preservation of Eastern Orthodox teaching. The calendar question reflects the dispute between those who wish to use a calendar which is reformed yet not Gregorian (effectively gaining the perceived benefits of the Gregorian calendar without disregarding the three anathemas issued against it in the sixteenth century), something which opponents consider unnecessary and damaging to continuity, and those who wish to maintain the traditional ecclesiastical calendar (which happens to be based on the Julian calendar), arguing that such a modern change goes against 1900 years of Church tradition and was in fact perpetrated without an ecumenical council, which would surely have rejected the idea.
The Pan-Orthodox Council, Kolymvari, Crete, Greece, June 2016
The dispute has led to much acrimony, and sometimes even to violence. Following canonical precepts, some adherents of the old calendar have chosen to abstain from clerical intercommunion with those synods which have embraced the new calendar until the conflict is resolved. The monastic communities on Mount Athos have provided the strongest opposition to the new calendar, and to modernism in general, while still maintaining communion with their mother church.
Some latent discontent between different national churches exists also in part due to different approach towards ecumenism. While the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople, the Orthodox bishops in North America gathered into the Standing Conference of the Canonical Orthodox Bishops in the Americas (SCOBA), Romanian bishops, and others are fairly open to dialog with the Roman Catholic Church, both conservative and moderate Old Calendarists, many of the monks of Mount Athos, several bishops of Russian, Serbian, and some of Greek and Bulgarian churches regard ecumenism as compromising essential doctrinal stands in order to accommodate other Christians, and object to the emphasis on dialogue leading to inter-communion; believing instead that Orthodox must speak the truth with love, in the hope of leading to the eventual conversion to Orthodoxy of heterodox Christians.
Eastern Orthodox Christians are among the wealthiest Christian denominations in the United States.[199] They also tend to be better educated than most other religious groups in America, having a high number of graduate (68%) and post-graduate (28%) degrees per capita.[200]
The Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia (ROCOR) has recently united with the Moscow Patriarchate (MP); these two branches of the Russian Orthodox Church had separated from each other in the 1920s due to the subjection of the latter to the hostile Soviet regime (see Act of Canonical Communion).
Main communion
The Orthodox Church is a communion of 14 autocephalous (that is, administratively completely independent) regional churches,[201] plus the Orthodox Church in America, which is recognised as autocephalous only by the Russian, Bulgarian, Georgian, Polish, the Czech-Slovak churches. Each has defined geographical boundaries of its jurisdiction and is ruled by its Council of Bishops or Synod presided by a senior bishop – its Primate (or First Hierarch). The Primate may carry the honorary title of Patriarch, Metropolitan (in the Slavic tradition) or Archbishop (in the Greek tradition).
Each regional church consists of constituent eparchies (or, dioceses) ruled by a bishop. Some churches have given an eparchy or group of eparchies varying degrees of autonomy (self-government). Such autonomous churches maintain varying levels of dependence on their mother church, usually defined in a Tomos or other document of autonomy.
Patriarchate of Peć in Kosovo, the seat of the Serbian Orthodox Church from the 14th century when its status was upgraded into a patriarchate
Cathedral of Evangelismos, Alexandria
Romanian People's Salvation Cathedral (under construction) will be the seat of the Romanian Patriarch
Below is a list of the 14 (15) autocephalous Orthodox churches, all of which are titled equal to each other, but the Ecumenical Patriarchate is titled first among equals. Based on these definitions, the list is in their order of precedence and alphabetical order where necessary, with constituent autonomous churches and exarchates. The Liturgical title of the Primate is listed in italics. The communion:
Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople (Archbishop of Constantinople-New Rome and First Among Equals Patriarch)
Autonomous Orthodox Church of Finland (Archbishop of Karelia and All Finland)
Self-governing Orthodox Church of Crete (Archbishop of Crete)
Self-governing Monastic Community of Mount Athos
Self-governing Orthodox Church of Korea (Metropolitan of Seoul and all Korea)
Exarchate of Patmos (Patriarchal Exarch of Patmos)
Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Thyateira and Great Britain (Archbishop of Thyateira and Great Britain)
Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Italy and Malta (Orthodox Archbishop of Italy and Malta and Exarch of Southern Europe)
Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America (Archbishop of America)
Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Australia (Archbishop of Australia)
Exarchate of the Philippines (Exarch of Philippines)
Patriarchal Exarchate for Orthodox Parishes of Russian Tradition in Western Europe (Archbishop of Komana)
Patriarchate of Alexandria (His Most Divine Beatitude the Pope and Patriarch of the Great City of Alexandria, Libya, Pentapolis, Ethiopia, all the land of Egypt, and all Africa, Father of Fathers, Shepherd of Shepherds, Prelate of Prelates, Thirteenth of the Apostles, and Judge of the Œcumene)
Patriarchate of Antioch (Patriarch of Antioch and all the East)
Self-governing Antiochian Orthodox Christian Archdiocese of North America (Archbishop of New York and Metropolitan of All North America)
Patriarchate of Jerusalem (Patriarch of the Holy City of Jerusalem and all Holy Land, Syria, Arabia, beyond the Jordan River, Cana of Galilee, and Sacred Zion)
Autonomous Church of Mount Sinai (Archbishop of Choreb, Sinai, and Raitha)
Patriarchate of Russia (Patriarch of Moscow and all Russia)
Autonomous Orthodox Church in Japan (Archbishop of Tokyo and Metropolitan of All Japan)
Autonomous Orthodox Church of China (defunct)
Exarchate of Belarus (Metropolitan of Minsk and Slutsk, Patriarchal Exarch of All Belarus)
Self-governing Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia (Metropolitan of Eastern America and New York, First Hierarch of the Russian church abroad)
Self-governing Orthodox Church of Ukraine (Metropolitan of Kiev and all Ukraine)
Self-governing Orthodox Church of Moldova (Metropolitan of Chişinău and all Moldova)
Self-governing Orthodox Church of Latvia (Metropolitan of Riga and all Latvia)
Self-governing Estonian Orthodox Church of Moscow Patriarchate (Metropolitan of Tallinn and all Estonia) [Autonomy not recognised by the Ecumenical Patriarchate]
Serbian Patriarchate (Archbishop of Peć, Metropolitan of Belgrade and Karlovci, and Serbian Patriarch)
Autonomous Orthodox Ohrid Archbishopric (Archbishop of Ohrid and Metropolitan of Skopje)
Patriarchate of Bulgaria (Metropolitan of Sofia and Patriarch of All Bulgaria)
Patriarchate of Romania (Archbishop of Bucharest, Metropolitan of Muntenia and Dobrudja, and Patriarch of All Romania)
Patriarchate of Georgia (Catholicos-Patriarch of All Georgia, the Archbishop of Mtskheta-Tbilisi and Metropolitan bishop of Abkhazia and Pitsunda.)
Church of Greece (Archbishop of Athens and all Greece)
Church of Cyprus (Archbishop of New Justiniana and all Cyprus)
Orthodox Church of Albania (Archbishop of Tirana, Durres and all Albania)
Orthodox Church in America (Archbishop of Washington, Metropolitan of All America and Canada)[e]
Orthodox Church of the Czech lands and Slovakia (Archbishop of Prague, the Metropolitan of Czech lands and Slovakia or the Archbishop of Presov, the Metropolitan of Czech lands and Slovakia)
Orthodox Church of Poland (Metropolitan of Warsaw and all Poland)
There are unresolved internal issues as to the autonomous or autocephalous status of the following Orthodox churches:
Estonian Apostolic Orthodox Church (Metropolitan of Tallinn and all Estonia) — Autonomy is recognised only by the Ecumenical Patriarchate, opposed only by the Russian Orthodox Church
Self-governing Metropolis of Bessarabia of the Romanian Orthodox Church — Autonomy is objected by the Russian Orthodox Church
Traditionalist groups
Traditional Paschal procession by Russian Orthodox Old-Rite Church
True Orthodoxy separated from the mainstream communion over issues of ecumenism and calendar reform since the 1920s.[202] The movement rejects the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople, the Moscow Patriarchate, and those Churches in communion with them, accusing them of heresy and placing themselves under bishops who do the same. They adhere to the use of the old Julian Calendar since Antiquity, claiming that the calendar reform in 1920s is in contravention of the Ecumenical Councils. True Orthodox writers have argued that in missionary areas such as the United States, Orthodox (SCOBA) membership numbers may be overstated, with the comparative number of True Orthodox as up to 15% of the Orthodox population, in Russia, it has been claimed by some clergy that up to a million Russians may be True Orthodox of different jurisdictions, though the total number is often cited at 1.7-2 million together.
There is no official communion of traditionalists. They often are local groups and are limited to a specific bishop or locality. The following is a list:
Churches descending from the Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia
Greek Old Calendarists
Old Calendar Bulgarian Orthodox Church
Old Calendar Romanian Orthodox Church
Russian Orthodox Autonomous Church
Serbian True Orthodox Church
Old Believers are groups that do not accept liturgical reforms carried out in the Russian Orthodox Church by Patriarch Nikon in the 17th century. Although all Old Believers groups emerged as a result of opposition to the Nikonian reform, they do not constitute a single monolithic body. Despite the emphasis on invariable adherence to the pre-Nikonian traditions, the Old Believers feature a great diversity of groups that profess different interpretations of the church tradition and often are not in communion with each other (some groups even practise re-baptism before admitting a member of another group into their midst).
Old Believers:
Russian Orthodox Old-Rite Church (Belokrinitskaya Hierarchy)
Lipovan Orthodox Old-Rite Church (Belokrinitskaya Hierarchy)
Russian Old-Orthodox Church (Novozybkovskaya Hierarchy)
Pomorian Old-Orthodox Church (Pomortsy)
Churches not in communion with others
Churches with irregular or unresolved canonical status are entities that have carried out episcopal consecrations outside of the norms of canon law or whose bishops have been excommunicated by one of the 14 (15) autocephalous churches. These include nationalist and other schisms.
Abkhazian Orthodox Church
Bulgarian Alternative Synod, in full communion with the Montenegrin Orthodox Church and the Ukrainian Orthodox Kiev Patriarchate
Belarusian Autocephalous Orthodox Church
Communion of the Western Orthodox Churches (Celtic Orthodox Church, French Orthodox Church, Orthodox Church of the Gauls)
Croatian Orthodox Church, existed 1942-45
Evangelical Orthodox Church, only Eastern Orthodox denomination that mixes with Charismatic and Evangelical elements.
Holy Orthodox Church in North America, in communion with Greek Old Calendarists
Lusitanian Orthodox Church
Macedonian Orthodox Church – The Church proclaimed independence, but this is objected by the Serbian Orthodox Church as a schism. Though officially unrecognised by the other churches in the communion, the Macedonian Orthodox Church de facto communicates with many of the churches.[203][204][205][206]
Montenegrin Orthodox Church, in full communion with the Bulgarian Alternative Synod and the Ukrainian Orthodox Kiev Patriarchate
Orthodox Church in Italy, since 2013 a vicariate of the Nordic Catholic Church known as the Old Catholic Church in Italy
Orthodox Church of Greece (Holy Synod in Resistance) (as of 2014 in communion with Greek Old Calendarists)
Russian True Orthodox Church aka Catacomb Church
True Russian Orthodox Church
Turkish Orthodox Church
Ukrainian Orthodox Church (Kiev Patriarchate), in full communion with the Bulgarian Alternative Synod and the Montenegrin Orthodox Church
Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church
Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church Canonical
Trinity
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Holy Trinity, depicted by Szymon Czechowicz (1756–1758)
The Adoration of the Trinity by Albrecht Dürer (1511)
The "Heavenly Trinity" joined to the "Earthly Trinity" through the Incarnation of the Son, by Murillo, c. 1677.[1]
The Christian doctrine of the Trinity (Latin: Trinitas, lit. 'triad', from Latin: trinus "threefold") [2] holds that God is three consubstantial persons[3] or hypostases[4]—the Father, the Son (Jesus Christ), and the Holy Spirit—as "one God in three Divine Persons". The three Persons are distinct, yet are one "substance, essence or nature" (homoousios).[5] In this context, a "nature" is what one is, whereas a "person" is who one is.[6][7][8] Sometimes differing views are referred to as nontrinitarian.
According to this central mystery of most Christian faiths, there is only one God in three Persons: while distinct from one another in their relations of origin (as the Fourth Council of the Lateran declared, "it is the Father who generates, the Son who is begotten, and the Holy Spirit who proceeds")[9] and in their relations with one another, they are stated to be one in all else, co-equal, co-eternal and consubstantial, and each is God, whole and entire.[10] Accordingly, the whole work of creation and grace in Christianity is seen as a single operation common to all three divine persons, in which each shows forth what is proper to him in the Trinity, so that all things are "from the Father", "through the Son" and "in the Holy Spirit".[11]
Trinitarian theologians believe that manifestations of the Trinity are made evident from the very beginning of the Bible. Genesis 1:1-3[12] posits God, His Spirit and the "creative word of God"[13][14] together in the initial Genesis creation narrative account. While the Fathers of the Church saw Old Testament elements such as the appearance of three men to Abraham in Book of Genesis, chapter 18, as foreshadowings of the Trinity, it was the New Testament that they saw as a basis for developing the concept of the Trinity. One of the most influential of the New Testament texts seen as implying the teaching of the Trinity was Matthew 28:19, which mandated baptizing "in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit". Another New Testament text pointing to the Trinity was John 1:1-14, in which the inter-relationships of the Triune God are reflected in the gospel author's description of "the Word", again showing the elements of the Triune God and their eternal (always was, always is, and always shall be) existence. (Revelation 1:8)
Reflection, proclamation, and dialogue led to the formulation of the doctrine that was felt to correspond to the data in the Bible.[15]
While scripture does not contain the word Trinity,[16] an indication of three distinct persons can be found in 1 John 5:7 for the validity of which exist a controversy known as Johannine Comma. Early Christian belief in the deity of Jesus Christ existed since the first century in the writings of John the Apostle. (John 1:1) Jesus is also quoted as attesting to being equal with the Father. (John 8:58, 10:30)
Romans 8:9-11 implies the interdependency or interrelatedness of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, while examining the redeemed individual, saved by grace, as evidenced by the indwelling Spirit of God.
Subsequently, in the understanding of Trinitarian theology, Scripture "bears witness to" the activity of a God who can only be understood in Trinitarian terms.[17] The doctrine did not take its definitive shape until late in the fourth century.[18] During the intervening period, various tentative solutions, some more and some less satisfactory, were proposed.[19]
Trinitarianism contrasts with positions such as Binitarianism (one deity in two persons, or two deities) and Monarchianism (no pluratity of persons within God), of which Modalistic Monarchianism (one deity revealed in three modes) and Unitarianism (one deity in one person) are subsets. Additionally, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints believes the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are three separate deities, two of which possess separate bodies of flesh and bones, while the Holy Ghost has only a body of spirit; and that their unity is not physical, but in purpose.[20]
Contents
1	Etymology
2	History
3	Theology
3.1	Trinitarian baptismal formula
3.2	Fundamental monotheism
3.3	One God as Three Persons
3.4	Perichoresis
3.5	Eternal generation and procession
3.6	Economic and immanent Trinity
3.7	Subordinationism
3.8	Political aspect
4	Biblical background
4.1	Jesus as God
4.2	Holy Spirit as God
4.3	Old Testament parallels
5	Impact of Stoic philosophy
6	Artistic depictions
6.1	Image gallery
7	Nontrinitarianism
8	Islamic views
9	Judaism
10	See also
11	Extended notes
12	Endnotes and references
12.1	Other references
13	Further reading
14	External links
Etymology
The word "trinity" is derived from Latin trinitas, meaning "the number three, a triad, tri". This abstract noun is formed from the adjective trinus (three each, threefold, triple),[21] as the word unitas is the abstract noun formed from unus (one).
The corresponding word in Greek is tριάς, meaning "a set of three" or "the number three".[22] The first recorded use of this Greek word in Christian theology was by Theophilus of Antioch in about the year of 170. He wrote:[23][24]
In like manner also the three days which were before the luminaries, are types of the Trinity [Τριάδος], of God, and His Word, and His wisdom. And the fourth is the type of man, who needs light, that so there may be God, the Word, wisdom, man.[25]
Tertullian, a Latin theologian who wrote in the early 3rd century, is credited as being the first to use the Latin words "Trinity",[26] "person" and "substance"[27] to explain that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are "tres personae, una substantia".[28] While "personae" is often translated as "persons," the Latin word personae is better understood as referring to roles as opposed to individual centers of consciousness.
History
The earliest known depiction of the Trinity, Dogmatic Sarcophagus, AD 350.[29] Vatican Museums
The Ante-Nicene Fathers asserted Christ's deity and spoke of "Father, Son and Holy Spirit", even though their language is not that of the traditional doctrine as formalised in the fourth century. Trinitarians view these as elements of the codified doctrine.[30] Ignatius of Antioch provides early support for the Trinity around 110,[31] exhorting obedience to "Christ, and to the Father, and to the Spirit".[32] Justin Martyr (AD 100–c. 165) also writes, "in the name of God, the Father and Lord of the universe, and of our Saviour Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Spirit".[33] The first of the early church fathers to be recorded using the word "Trinity" was Theophilus of Antioch writing in the late 2nd century. He defines the Trinity as God, His Word (Logos) and His Wisdom (Sophia)[34] in the context of a discussion of the first three days of creation. The first defence of the doctrine of the Trinity was in the early 3rd century by the early church father Tertullian. He explicitly defined the Trinity as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit and defended his theology against "Praxeas",[35] though he noted that the majority of the believers in his day found issue with his doctrine.[26] St. Justin and Clement of Alexandra used the Trinity in their doxologies and St. Basil likewise, in the evening lighting of lamps.[36] Origen of Alexandria (AD 185-c. 253) has often been interpreted as Subordinationist, but some modern researchers have argued that Origen might have actually been anti-Subordinationist.[37][38]
Another early, and already more philosophic, formulation of the Trinity (again without usage of that term) is attributed to the Gnostic teacher Valentinus (lived c.100 – c.160), who according to the fourth century theologian Marcellus of Ancyra, was “the first to devise the notion of three subsistent entities (hypostases), in a work that he entitled On the Three Natures.” The highly allegorical exegesis of the Valentinian school inclined it to interpret the relevant scriptural passages as affirming a Divinity that, in some manner, is threefold. The Valentinian Gospel of Philip, which dates to approximately the time of Tertullian, upholds the Trinitarian formula. Whatever his influence on the later fully formed doctrine may have been, however, Valentinus's school is rejected as heretical by orthodox Christians.
Although there is much debate as to whether the beliefs of the Apostles were merely articulated and explained in the Trinitarian Creeds,[39] or were corrupted and replaced with new beliefs,[40][41] all scholars recognize that the Creeds themselves were created in reaction to disagreements over the nature of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. These controversies took some centuries to be resolved.
Of these controversies, the most significant developments were articulated in the first four centuries by the Church Fathers[39] in reaction to Adoptionism, Sabellianism, and Arianism. Adoptionism was the belief that Jesus was an ordinary man, born of Joseph and Mary, who became the Christ and Son of God at his baptism. In 269, the Synods of Antioch condemned Paul of Samosata for his Adoptionist theology, and also condemned the term homoousios (ὁμοούσιος, "of the same being") in the sense he used it.[42]
Sabellianism taught that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are essentially one and the same, the difference being simply verbal, describing different aspects or roles of a single being.[43] For this view Sabellius was excommunicated for heresy in Rome c. 220.
In the fourth century, Arius, as traditionally understood,[note 1] taught that the Father existed prior to the Son who was not, by nature, God but rather a changeable creature who was granted the dignity of becoming "Son of God".[44] In 325, the Council of Nicaea adopted the Nicene Creed which described Christ as "God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God, begotten, not made, being of one substance with the Father".[45][46] The creed used the term homoousios (of one substance) to define the relationship between the Father and the Son. After more than fifty years of debate, homoousios was recognised as the hallmark of orthodoxy, and was further developed into the formula of "three persons, one being".
The third Council of Sirmium, in 357, was the high point of Arianism. The Seventh Arian Confession (Second Sirmium Confession) held that both homoousios (of one substance) and homoiousios (of similar substance) were unbiblical and that the Father is greater than the Son. (This confession was later known as the Blasphemy of Sirmium)
But since many persons are disturbed by questions concerning what is called in Latin substantia, but in Greek ousia, that is, to make it understood more exactly, as to 'coessential,' or what is called, 'like-in-essence,' there ought to be no mention of any of these at all, nor exposition of them in the Church, for this reason and for this consideration, that in divine Scripture nothing is written about them, and that they are above men's knowledge and above men's understanding;[47]
Athanasius (293–373), who was present at the Council as one of the Bishop of Alexandria's assistants, stated that the bishops were forced to use this terminology,[48] which is not found in Scripture, because the biblical phrases that they would have preferred to use were claimed by the Arians to be capable of being interpreted in what the bishops considered to be a heretical sense.[49] Moreover, the meanings of "ousia" and "hypostasis" overlapped then, so that "hypostasis" for some meant "essence" and for others "person".
The Confession of the Council of Nicaea said little about the Holy Spirit.[50] The doctrine of the divinity and personality of the Holy Spirit was developed by Athanasius in the last decades of his life.[51] He defended and refined the Nicene formula.[50] By the end of the 4th century, under the leadership of Basil of Caesarea, Gregory of Nyssa, and Gregory of Nazianzus (the Cappadocian Fathers), the doctrine had reached substantially its current form.[50]
Gregory of Nazianzus would say of the Trinity, "No sooner do I conceive of the One than I am illumined by the splendour of the Three; no sooner do I distinguish Three than I am carried back into the One. When I think of any of the Three, I think of Him as the Whole, and my eyes are filled, and the greater part of what I am thinking escapes me. I cannot grasp the greatness of that One so as to attribute a greater greatness to the rest. When I contemplate the Three together, I see but one torch, and cannot divide or measure out the undivided light."[52]
Devotion to the Trinity centered in the French monasteries at Tours and Aniane where Saint Benedict dedicated the abbey church to the Trinity in 872.[53] Feast Days were not instituted until 1091 at Cluny and 1162 at Canterbury and papal resistance continued until 1331.[54]
Theology
Trinitarian baptismal formula
The Baptism of Christ, by Piero della Francesca, 15th century
In the synoptic Gospels the baptism of Jesus is often interpreted as a manifestation of all three persons of the Trinity: "And when Jesus was baptized, he went up immediately from the water, and behold, the heavens were opened and he saw the spirit of God descending like a dove, and alighting on him; and lo, a voice from heaven, saying, 'This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased.'"[Mt 3:16–17] Baptism is generally conferred with the Trinitarian formula, "in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit".[Mt 28:19] Trinitarians identify this name with the Christian faith into which baptism is an initiation, as seen for example in the statement of Basil the Great (330–379): "We are bound to be baptized in the terms we have received, and to profess faith in the terms in which we have been baptized." The First Council of Constantinople (381) also says, "This is the Faith of our baptism that teaches us to believe in the Name of the Father, of the Son and of the Holy Spirit. According to this Faith there is one Godhead, Power, and Being of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit." Matthew 28:19 may be taken to indicate that baptism was associated with this formula from the earliest decades of the Church's existence.
Oneness Pentecostals demur from the Trinitarian view of baptism and emphasize baptism ‘in the name of Jesus Christ’ as the original apostolic formula.[55] For this reason, they often focus on the baptisms in Acts. Those who place great emphasis on the baptisms in Acts often likewise question the authenticity of Matthew 28:19 in its present form. Most scholars of New Testament textual criticism accept the authenticity of the passage, since there are no variant manuscripts regarding the formula, and the extant form of the passage is attested in the Didache[56] and other patristic works of the 1st and 2nd centuries: Ignatius,[57] Tertullian,[58] Hippolytus,[59] Cyprian,[60] and Gregory Thaumaturgus.[61]
Commenting on Matthew 28:19, Gerhard Kittel states:
This threefold relation [of Father, Son and Spirit] soon found fixed expression in the triadic formulae in 2 Cor. 13:14 and in 1 Cor. 12:4–6. The form is first found in the baptismal formula in Matthew 28:19; Did., 7. 1 and 3....[I]t is self-evident that Father, Son and Spirit are here linked in an indissoluble threefold relationship.[62]
Fundamental monotheism
Christianity, having emerged from Judaism, is a monotheistic religion. Never in the New Testament does the Trinitarian concept become a "tritheism" (three Gods) nor even two.[63] God is one, and that God is a single being is strongly declared in the Bible:
The Shema of the Hebrew Scriptures: "Hear, O Israel: the LORD our Gods, the LORD is one."[Deut 6:4]
The first of the Ten Commandments—"Thou shalt have no other gods before me."[5:7]
And "Thus saith the LORD the King of Israel and his redeemer the LORD of hosts: I am the first and I am the last; and beside me there is no God."[Isa 44:6]
In the New Testament: "The LORD our God is one."[Mk 12:29]
In the Trinitarian view, the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit share the one essence, substance or being. The central and crucial affirmation of Christian faith is that there is one savior, God, and one salvation, manifest in Jesus Christ, to which there is access only because of the Holy Spirit. The God of the Old Testament is still the same as the God of the New. In Christianity, statements about a single God are intended to distinguish the Hebraic understanding from the polytheistic view, which see divine power as shared by several beings, beings which can and do disagree and have conflicts with each other.
One God as Three Persons
The
FatherSonHoly
Spirit
The image above contains clickable links The "Shield of the Trinity" or Scutum Fidei diagram of traditional medieval Western Christian symbolism
In Trinitarian doctrine, God exists as three persons or hypostases, but is one being, having a single divine nature.[64] The members of the Trinity are co-equal and co-eternal, one in essence, nature, power, action, and will. As stated in the Athanasian Creed, the Father is uncreated, the Son is uncreated, and the Holy Spirit is uncreated, and all three are eternal without beginning.[65] "The Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit" are not names for different parts of God, but one name for God[66] because three persons exist in God as one entity.[67] They cannot be separate from one another. Each person is understood as having the identical essence or nature, not merely similar natures.[68]
For Trinitarians, emphasis in Genesis 1:26 is on the plurality in the Deity, and in 1:27 on the unity of the divine Essence. A possible interpretation of Genesis 1:26 is that God's relationships in the Trinity are mirrored in man by the ideal relationship between husband and wife, two persons becoming one flesh, as described in Eve's creation later in the next chapter.[2:22]
Perichoresis
A depiction of the Council of Nicaea in AD 325, at which the Deity of Christ was declared orthodox and Arianism condemned
Perichoresis (from Greek, "going around", "envelopment") is a term used by some theologians to describe the relationship among the members of the Trinity. The Latin equivalent for this term is circumincessio. This concept refers for its basis to John 14–17, where Jesus is instructing the disciples concerning the meaning of his departure. His going to the Father, he says, is for their sake; so that he might come to them when the "other comforter" is given to them. Then, he says, his disciples will dwell in him, as he dwells in the Father, and the Father dwells in him, and the Father will dwell in them. This is so, according to the theory of perichoresis, because the persons of the Trinity "reciprocally contain one another, so that one permanently envelopes and is permanently enveloped by, the other whom he yet envelopes". (Hilary of Poitiers, Concerning the Trinity 3:1).[69]
Perichoresis effectively excludes the idea that God has parts, but rather is a simple being. It also harmonizes well with the doctrine that the Christian's union with the Son in his humanity brings him into union with one who contains in himself, in the Apostle Paul's words, "all the fullness of deity" and not a part. (See also: Divinization (Christian)). Perichoresis provides an intuitive figure of what this might mean. The Son, the eternal Word, is from all eternity the dwelling place of God; he is the "Father's house", just as the Son dwells in the Father and the Spirit; so that, when the Spirit is "given", then it happens as Jesus said, "I will not leave you as orphans; for I will come to you."[John 14:18]
According to the words of Jesus, married persons are in some sense no longer two but are joined into one. Therefore, Orthodox theologians also see the marriage relationship between a man and a woman to be an example of this sacred union. "Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh." Gen. 2:24. "Wherefore they are no more twain but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let no man put asunder." Matt. 19: 6.[image or "icon" 17:22]
Eternal generation and procession
Trinitarianism affirms that the Son is "begotten" (or "generated") of the Father and that the Spirit "proceeds" from the Father, but the Father is "neither begotten nor proceeds". The argument over whether the Spirit proceeds from the Father alone, or from the Father and the Son, was one of the catalysts of the Great Schism, in this case concerning the Western addition of the Filioque clause to the Nicene Creed. The Roman Catholic Church teaches that, in the sense of the Latin verb procedere (which does not have to indicate ultimate origin and is therefore compatible with proceeding through), but not in that of the Greek verb ἐκπορεύεσθαι (which implies ultimate origin),[70] the Spirit "proceeds" from the Father and the Son, and the Eastern Orthodox Church, which teaches that the Spirit "proceeds" from the Father alone, has made no statement on the claim of a difference in meaning between the two words, one Greek and one Latin, both of which are translated as "proceeds". The Eastern Orthodox Churches object to the Filioque clause on ecclesiological and theological grounds, holding that "from the Father" means "from the Father alone".
This language is often considered difficult because, if used regarding humans or other created things, it would imply time and change; when used here, no beginning, change in being, or process within time is intended and is excluded. The Son is generated ("born" or "begotten"), and the Spirit proceeds, eternally. Augustine of Hippo explains, "Thy years are one day, and Thy day is not daily, but today; because Thy today yields not to tomorrow, for neither does it follow yesterday. Thy today is eternity; therefore Thou begat the Co-eternal, to whom Thou saidst, 'This day have I begotten Thee.'"[Ps 2:7]
Most Protestant groups that use the creed also include the Filioque clause. Its controversial use is addressed in several confessions: the Westminster Confession 2:3, the London Baptist Confession 2:3, and the Lutheran Augsburg Confession 1:1–6.
Economic and immanent Trinity
The term "immanent Trinity" focuses on who God is; the term “economic Trinity” focuses on what God does.
According to the Catechism of the Catholic Church,
The Fathers of the Church distinguish between theology (theologia) and economy (oikonomia). "Theology" refers to the mystery of God's inmost life within the Blessed Trinity and "economy" to all the works by which God reveals himself and communicates his life. Through the oikonomia the theologia is revealed to us; but conversely, the theologia illuminates the whole oikonomia. God's works reveal who he is in himself; the mystery of his inmost being enlightens our understanding of all his works. So it is, analogously, among human persons. A person discloses himself in his actions, and the better we know a person, the better we understand his actions.[71]
The ancient Nicene theologians argued that everything the Trinity does is done by Father, Son, and Spirit working in unity with one will. The three persons of the Trinity always work inseparably, for their work is always the work of the one God. The Son's will cannot be different from the Father's because it is the Father's. They have but one will as they have but one being. Otherwise they would not be one God. According to Phillip Cary, if there were relations of command and obedience between the Father and the Son, there would be no Trinity at all but rather three gods.[72] On this point St. Basil observes "When then He says, 'I have not spoken of myself', and again, 'As the Father said unto me, so I speak', and 'The word which ye hear is not mine, but [the Father's] which sent me', and in another place, 'As the Father gave me commandment, even so I do', it is not because He lacks deliberate purpose or power of initiation, nor yet because He has to wait for the preconcerted key-note, that he employs language of this kind. His object is to make it plain that His own will is connected in indissoluble union with the Father. Do not then let us understand by what is called a 'commandment' a peremptory mandate delivered by organs of speech, and giving orders to the Son, as to a subordinate, concerning what He ought to do. Let us rather, in a sense befitting the Godhead, perceive a transmission of will, like the reflexion of an object in a mirror, passing without note of time from Father to Son."[73]
A Greek fresco of Athanasius of Alexandria, the chief architect of the Nicene Creed, formulated at Nicaea.
Athanasius of Alexandria explained that the Son is eternally one in being with the Father, temporally and voluntarily subordinate in his incarnate ministry.[74] Such human traits, he argued, were not to be read back into the eternal Trinity. Likewise, the Cappadocian Fathers also insisted there was no economic inequality present within the Trinity. As Basil wrote: "We perceive the operation of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit to be one and the same, in no respect showing differences or variation; from this identity of operation we necessarily infer the unity of nature."[75]
The traditional theory of "appropriation" consists in attributing certain names, qualities, or operations to one of the Persons of the Trinity, not, however, to the exclusion of the others, but in preference to the others. This theory was established by the Latin Fathers of the fourth and fifth centuries, especially by Hilary of Poitiers, Augustine, and Leo the Great. In the Middle Ages, the theory was systematically taught by the Schoolmen such as Bonaventure.[76]
Subordinationism
Roger E. Olson says that a number of evangelical theologians hold the view that there is a hierarchy of authority in the Trinity with the Son being subordinate to the Father. "The Gospel of John makes this clear as Jesus repeatedly mentions that he came to do the Father's will."[77] Olsen cautions, however, that the hierarchy in the "economic Trinity" should be distinguished from the "immanent Trinity". He cites the Cappadocian Fathers, "the Father is the source or “fount” of divinity within the Godhead; the Son and the Spirit derive their deity from the Father eternally (so there is no question of inequality of being). Their favorite analogy was the sun and its light and heat. There is no imagining the sun without its light and heat and yet it is the source of them."[77]
Benjamin B. Warfield saw a principle of subordination in the "modes of operation" of the Trinity, but was also hesitant to ascribe the same to the "modes of subsistence" in relation of one to another. While noting that it is natural to see a subordination in function as reflecting a similar subordination in substance, he suggests that this might be the result of "...an agreement by Persons of the Trinity – a "Covenant" as it is technically called – by virtue of which a distinct function in the work of redemption is assumed by each".[78]
Political aspect
Richard E. Rubenstein says that Emperor Constantine and his advisor Hosius of Corduba were aware of the usefulness of having a divinely ordained church in which the church authority, and not the individual, was able to determine individual salvation, and threw their support toward the homoousion Nicene formula.[79] According to Eusebius, Constantine suggested the term homoousios at the Council of Nicaea, though most scholars have doubted that Constantine had such knowledge and have thought that most likely Hosius had suggested the term to him.[80] Constantine later changed his view about the Arians, who opposed the Nicene formula, and supported the bishops who rejected the formula,[81] as did several of his successors, the first emperor to be baptized in the Nicene faith being Theodosius the Great, emperor from 379 to 395.[82]
Biblical background
From the Old Testament, the early church retained the conviction that God is one.[83] The New Testament does not use the word Τριάς (Trinity)[84] nor explicitly teach the Nicene Trinitarian doctrine, but it contains several passages that use twofold and threefold patterns to speak of God. Binitarian passages include Rom. 8:11, 2 Cor. 4:14, Galatians 1:1, Eph. 1:20, 1 Tim. 1:2, 1 Pet. 1:21, and 2 John 1:13. Passages which refer to the Godhead with a threefold pattern include Matt. 28:19, 1 Cor. 6:11 and 12:4ff., Gal. 3:11–14, Heb. 10:29, 1 Pet. 1:2 and 1 John 5:7. These passages provided the material with which Christians would develop doctrines of the Trinity.[83] Reflection by early Christians on passages such as the Great Commission: "Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit"[Matt 28:19] and Paul the Apostle's blessing: "The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with you all",[2 Cor. 13:14] while at the same time the Jewish Shema Yisrael: "Hear, O Israel: The Lord is our God, the Lord alone."[Deuteronomy 6:4][85] has led some Christians to question how the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are "one". Eventually, the diverse references to God, Jesus, and the Spirit found in the New Testament were brought together to form the doctrine of the Trinity—one God subsisting in three persons and one substance. The doctrine of the Trinity was used to combat heretical tendencies of how the three are related and to defend the church against charges of worshiping two or three gods.[86]
Some scholars dispute the idea that support for the Trinity can be found in the Bible, and argue that the doctrine is the result of theological interpretations rather than sound exegesis of scripture.[87][88] The concept was expressed in early writings from the beginning of the 2nd century forward, and other scholars hold that the way the New Testament repeatedly speaks of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit is such as to require one to accept a Trinitarian understanding.[63]
The Comma Johanneum, 1 John 5:7, is a disputed text which states: "For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these three are one." However, this passage is not considered to be part of the genuine text,[89] and most scholars agree that the phrase was a gloss.[90]
Jesus as God
God in the person of the Son confronts Adam and Eve, by Master Bertram (d. c.1415)
The Gospel of John has been seen as especially aimed at emphasizing Jesus' divinity, presenting Jesus as the Logos, pre-existent and divine, from its first words, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God."[John 1:1][91] The Gospel of John ends with Thomas's declaration that he believed Jesus was God, "My Lord and my God!"[John 20:28][86] There is no significant tendency among modern scholars to deny that John 1:1 and John 20:28 identify Jesus with God.[92] John also portrays Jesus as the agent of creation of the universe.[93]
There are also a few possible biblical supports for the divinity of Jesus found in the Synoptic Gospels. The Gospel of Matthew, for example, quotes Jesus as saying, "All things have been handed over to me by my Father."[Mt 11:27] This is similar to John, who wrote that Jesus said, "All that the Father has is mine."[John 16:15] These verses have been quoted to defend the omnipotence of Christ, having all power, as well as the omniscience of Christ, having all wisdom.
Expressions also in the Pauline epistles have been interpreted as attributing divinity to Jesus. They include: "For by him all things were created: things in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or powers or rulers or authorities; all things were created by him and for him"[Colossians 1:16] and "For in Christ all the fullness of the Deity lives in bodily form",[Colossians 2:9] and in Paul the Apostle's claim to have been "sent not from men nor by man, but by Jesus Christ and God the Father".[Galatians 1:1][94]
Some have suggested that John presents a hierarchy when he quotes Jesus as saying, "The Father is greater than I",[14:28] a statement which was appealed to by nontrinitarian groups such as Arianism.[95] However, Church Fathers such as Augustine of Hippo argued this statement was to be understood as Jesus speaking in as to his human nature.[96]
Holy Spirit as God
As the Arian controversy was dissipating, the debate moved from the deity of Jesus Christ to the equality of the Holy Spirit with the Father and Son. On one hand, the Pneumatomachi sect declared that the Holy Spirit was an inferior person to the Father and Son. On the other hand, the Cappadocian Fathers argued that the Holy Spirit was an equal person to the Father and Son.
Although the main text used in defense of the deity of the Holy Spirit was Matthew 28:19, Cappadocian Fathers such as Basil the Great argued from other verses such as "But Peter said, 'Ananias, why has Satan filled your heart to lie to the Holy Spirit and to keep back for yourself part of the proceeds of the land? While it remained unsold, did it not remain your own? And after it was sold, was it not at your disposal? Why is it that you have contrived this deed in your heart? You have not lied to men but to God.'"[Acts 5:3–4][97]
Another passage the Cappadocian Fathers quoted from was "By the word of the Lord the heavens were made, and by the breath of his mouth all their host."[Psalm 33:6] According to their understanding, because "breath" and "spirit" in Hebrew are both "רוּחַ" ("ruach"), Psalm 33:6 is revealing the roles of the Son and Holy Spirit as co-creators. And since, according to them,[97] because only the holy God can create holy beings such as the angels, the Son and Holy Spirit must be God.
Yet another argument from the Cappadocian Fathers to prove that the Holy Spirit is of the same nature as the Father and Son comes from "For who knows a person's thoughts except the spirit of that person, which is in him? So also no one comprehends the thoughts of God except the Spirit of God."[1Cor. 2:11] They reasoned that this passage proves that the Holy Spirit has the same relationship to God as the spirit within us has to us.[97]
The Cappadocian Fathers also quoted, "Do you not know that you are God's temple and that God's Spirit dwells in you?"[1Cor. 3:16] and reasoned that it would be blasphemous for an inferior being to take up residence in a temple of God, thus proving that the Holy Spirit is equal with the Father and the Son.[98]
They also combined "the servant does not know what his master is doing"[John 15:15] with 1 Corinthians 2:11 in an attempt to show that the Holy Spirit is not the slave of God, and therefore his equal.[99]
The Pneumatomachi contradicted the Cappadocian Fathers by quoting, "Are they not all ministering spirits sent out to serve for the sake of those who are to inherit salvation?"[Hebrews 1:14] in effect arguing that the Holy Spirit is no different from other created angelic spirits.[100] The Church Fathers disagreed, saying that the Holy Spirit is greater than the angels, since the Holy Spirit is the one who grants the foreknowledge for prophecy[1Cor. 12:8–10] so that the angels could announce events to come.[97]
The usage of the word "paraclete" (Greek: parakletos) for the Holy Spirit in John 14:16, which can be translated as advocate, intercessor, counsellor or protector,[101] and the Holy Spirit's essence and action characterized by truth, as all three persons of the Trinity are linked with truth (see v. 17),[102] are seen as arguments that he is a divine person; especially that Jesus calls him another counsellor, in this way expressing that the Holy Spirit is similar to himself in regard to our counsel.[103]
Old Testament parallels
Russian icon of the Old Testament Trinity by Andrey Rublev, between 1408 and 1425
In addition, the Old Testament has also been interpreted as foreshadowing the Trinity,[104] by referring to God's word,[Ps 33:6] his spirit,[Isa 61:1] and Wisdom,[Prov 9:1] as well as narratives such as the appearance of the three men to Abraham.[Gen 18][105] However, it is generally agreed among Trinitarian Christian scholars that it would go beyond the intention and spirit of the Old Testament to correlate these notions directly with later Trinitarian doctrine.[106][107]
Some Church Fathers believed that a knowledge of the mystery was granted to the prophets and saints of the Old Testament, and that they identified the divine messenger of Genesis 16:7,21:17, 31:11, Exodus 3:2 and Wisdom of the sapiential books with the Son, and "the spirit of the Lord" with the Holy Spirit.[106] Other Church Fathers, such as Gregory Nazianzen, argued in his Orations that the revelation was gradual, claiming that the Father was proclaimed in the Old Testament openly, but the Son only obscurely, because "it was not safe, when the Godhead of the Father was not yet acknowledged, plainly to proclaim the Son".[108]
Genesis 18–19 has been interpreted by Christians as a Trinitarian text.[109] The narrative has the Lord appearing to Abraham, who was visited by three men.[Gen 18:1–2] Then in Genesis 19, "the two angels" visited Lot at Sodom. The interplay between Abraham on the one hand and the Lord/three men/the two angels on the other was an intriguing text for those who believed in a single God in three persons. Justin Martyr, and John Calvin similarly, interpreted it such that Abraham was visited by God, who was accompanied by two angels.[110] Justin supposed that the God who visited Abraham was distinguishable from the God who remains in the heavens, but was nevertheless identified as the (monotheistic) God. Justin appropriated the God who visited Abraham to Jesus, the second person of the Trinity.
Augustine, in contrast, held that the three visitors to Abraham were the three persons of the Trinity.[110] He saw no indication that the visitors were unequal, as would be the case in Justin's reading. Then in Genesis 19, two of the visitors were addressed by Lot in the singular: "Lot said to them, 'Not so, my lord.'"[Gen 19:18 KJV][110] Augustine saw that Lot could address them as one because they had a single substance, despite the plurality of persons.[note 2]
According to Swedenborg, the three angels which appeared to Abraham do represent the Trinity, but a Trinity of one being: the Divine Itself, the Divine Human and the Divine Proceeding. That one being is represented is indicated by the fact that they are referred to in the singular as Jehovah and Lord.[111] The reason why only two of the angels went to visit Sodom and Gomorrah is that they represent the Divine Human and the Divine Proceeding, and to those aspects of the Divine belongs judgment, as Jesus declared that all judgment was entrusted by the Father to the Son.[John 5:22][112] The three angels did indeed appear to Abraham as three men, but they are only a symbolic representation of the Trinity, which should not be taken literally as three distinct persons. In the Old Testament, Swedenborg finds the earliest direct reference to a Trine in the Divinity in the account of Moses' encounter with the Lord in Exodus which states, "And Jehovah passed by upon his face, and called, Jehovah, Jehovah, a God merciful and gracious."[Exodus 34:6][113]
Some Christians interpret the theophanies or appearances of the Angel of the Lord as revelations of a person distinct from God, who is nonetheless called God.[114] This interpretation is found in Christianity as early as Justin Martyr and Melito of Sardis, and reflects ideas that were already present in Philo.[115] The Old Testament theophanies were thus seen as Christophanies, each a "preincarnate appearance of the Messiah".[116]
Impact of Stoic philosophy
In the introduction to his 1964 translation of Meditations,[117] the Anglican priest Maxwell Staniforth discussed the profound influence of Stoic philosophy on Christianity. In particular:
Again in the doctrine of the Trinity, the ecclesiastical conception of Father, Word, and Spirit finds its germ in the different Stoic names of the Divine Unity. Thus Seneca, writing of the supreme Power which shapes the universe, states, 'This Power we sometimes call the All-ruling God, sometimes the incorporeal Wisdom, sometimes the holy Spirit, sometimes Destiny.' The Church had only to reject the last of these terms to arrive at its own acceptable definition of the Divine Nature; while the further assertion 'these three are One', which the modern mind finds paradoxical, was no more than commonplace to those familiar with Stoic notions.
Artistic depictions
The Trinity is most commonly seen in Christian art with the Spirit represented by a dove, as specified in the Gospel accounts of the Baptism of Christ; he is nearly always shown with wings outspread. However depictions using three human figures appear occasionally in most periods of art.[118]
The Father and the Son are usually differentiated by age, and later by dress, but this too is not always the case. The usual depiction of the Father as an older man with a white beard may derive from the biblical Ancient of Days, which is often cited in defense of this sometimes controversial representation. However, in Eastern Orthodoxy the Ancient of Days is usually understood to be God the Son, not God the Father (see below)—early Byzantine images show Christ as the Ancient of Days,[119] but this iconography became rare. When the Father is depicted in art, he is sometimes shown with a halo shaped like an equilateral triangle, instead of a circle. The Son is often shown at the Father's right hand.[Acts 7:56] He may be represented by a symbol—typically the Lamb (agnus dei) or a cross—or on a crucifix, so that the Father is the only human figure shown at full size. In early medieval art, the Father may be represented by a hand appearing from a cloud in a blessing gesture, for example in scenes of the Baptism of Christ. Later, in the West, the Throne of Mercy (or "Throne of Grace") became a common depiction. In this style, the Father (sometimes seated on a throne) is shown supporting either a crucifix[120] or, later, a slumped crucified Son, similar to the Pietà (this type is distinguished in German as the Not Gottes)[121] in his outstretched arms, while the Dove hovers above or in between them. This subject continued to be popular until the 18th century at least.
By the end of the 15th century, larger representations, other than the Throne of Mercy, became effectively standardised, showing an older figure in plain robes for the Father, Christ with his torso partly bare to display the wounds of his Passion, and the dove above or around them. In earlier representations both Father, especially, and Son often wear elaborate robes and crowns. Sometimes the Father alone wears a crown, or even a papal tiara.
In the later part of the Christian Era, in Renaissance European iconography, the Eye of Providence began to be used as an explicit image of the Christian Trinity and associated with the concept of Divine Providence. Seventeenth-century depictions of the Eye of Providence sometimes show it surrounded by clouds or sunbursts.[122]
Image gallery
Depiction of Trinity from Saint Denis Basilica in Paris (12th century)
Father, The Holy Spirit, and Christ Crucified, depicted in a Welsh manuscript. c. 1390–1400
God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit as a dove, by Lucas Cranach the Elder (d. 1553)
God the Father (top), and the Holy Spirit (represented by a dove) depicted above Jesus. Painting by Francesco Albani (d. 1660)
God the Father (top), the Holy Spirit (a dove), and child Jesus, painting by Bartolomé Esteban Murillo (d. 1682)
Pope Clement I prays to the Trinity, in a typical post-Renaissance depiction by Gianbattista Tiepolo (d. 1770)
Atypical depiction. The Son is identified by a lamb, the Father an Eye of Providence, and the Spirit a dove, painting by Fridolin Leiber (d. 1912)
13th Century depiction of the Trinity from a Roman de la Rose manuscript
A Christian version of the Eye of Providence, emphasizing the triangle representing the Trinity
Nontrinitarianism
Nontrinitarianism (or antitrinitarianism) refers to Christian belief systems that reject the doctrine of the Trinity as found in the Nicene Creed as not having a scriptural origin. Nontrinitarian views differ widely on the nature of God, Jesus, and the Holy Spirit. Various nontrinitarian views, such as Adoptionism, Monarchianism and Arianism existed prior to the formal definition of the Trinity doctrine in AD 325, 360, and 431, at the Councils of Nicaea, Constantinople, and Ephesus, respectively.[123] Following the final victory of orthodoxy at Constantinople in 381, Arianism was driven from the Empire, retaining a foothold amongst the Teutonic tribes. When the Franks converted to Catholicism in 496, however, it gradually faded out.[124] Nontrinitarianism was later renewed in the Gnosticism of the Cathars in the 11th through 13th centuries, in the Age of Enlightenment of the 18th century, and in some groups arising during the Second Great Awakening of the 19th century.
Modern nontrinitarian groups or denominations include Christadelphians, Christian Scientists, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Dawn Bible Students, Friends General Conference, Iglesia ni Cristo, Jehovah's Witnesses, Living Church of God, Oneness Pentecostals, the Seventh Day Church of God, Unitarian Universalist Christians, United Church of God, The Shepherd's Chapel and Spiritism.
Islamic views
Islam considers Jesus to be a prophet, but not divine,[125] and Allah to be absolutely indivisible (a concept known as tawhid).[126] Several verses of the Qur'an state that the doctrine of the Trinity is blasphemous.[127][128]
"Say: He is God, the One and Only; God, the Eternal, Absolute; He begetteth not, nor is He begotten; And there is none like unto Him.
— Qur'an, sura 112 (Al-Ikhlas), ayat 1–4[129]
Certainly they disbelieve who say: Surely Allah is the third (person) of the three; and there is no god but the one Allah, and if they desist not from what they say, a painful chastisement shall befall those among them who disbelieve.
— Qur'an, sura 5 (Al-Ma'idah), ayat 73[130]
And when Allah will say: O Isa son of Marium! did you say to men, Take me and my mother for two gods besides Allah he will say: Glory be to Thee, it did not befit me that I should say what I had no right to (say); if I had said it, Thou wouldst indeed have known it; Thou knowest what is in my mind, and I do not know what is in Thy mind, surely Thou art the great Knower of the unseen things.
— Qur'an, sura 5 (Al-Ma'idah), ayat 116[131]
Interpretation of these verses by modern scholars has been varied.[132][133] Verse 5:73 has been interpreted as a potential criticism of Syriac literature that references Jesus as "the third of three" and thus an attack on the view that Christ was divine.[134]
Edward Hulmes writes:
"The Qur'anic interpretation of trinitarian orthodoxy as belief in the Father, the Son, and the Virgin Mary, may owe less to a misunderstanding of the New Testament itself than to a recognition of the role accorded by local Christians (see Choloridians) to Mary as mother in a special sense."[135]
There is also debate about whether this verse should be taken literally.[136] For example, Thomas states that verse 5:116 need not be seen as describing actually professed beliefs, but rather, giving examples of shirk (claiming divinity for beings other than God) and a "warning against excessive devotion to Jesus and extravagant veneration of Mary, a reminder linked to the central theme of the Qur'an that there is only one God and He alone is to be worshipped."[132] When read in this light, it can be understood as an admonition, "Against the divinization of Jesus that is given elsewhere in the Qur'an and a warning against the virtual divinization of Mary in the declaration of the fifth-century church councils that she is 'God-bearer'."[132]
Judaism
Judaism traditionally maintains a tradition of monotheism to the exclusion of the possibility of a Trinity.[125] In Judaism, God is understood to be the absolute one, indivisible, and incomparable being who is the ultimate cause of all existence. The idea of God as a duality or trinity is heretical — it is even considered by some polytheistic.[137]
See also
Ayyavazhi Trinity
Trimurti
San Qing, the Taoist Trinity
Social trinitarianism
Thomas F. Torrance, contemporary theologian
Trikaya, the three Buddha bodies
Trinitarian Order
Trinitarian Universalism
Trinity Sunday, a day to celebrate the doctrine
Triple deity, an associated term in Comparative religion
Trimurti
Extended notes
Very little of Arius' own writings have survived. We depend largely on quotations made by opponents which reflect what they thought he was saying. Furthermore, there was no single Arian party or agenda but rather various critics of the Nicene formula working from distinct perspectives.(see Williams, Rowan. Arius SPCK (2nd edn, 2001) p.95ff & pp.247ff)
Augustine had poor knowledge of the Greek language, and no knowledge of Hebrew. So he trusted the LXX Septuagint, which differentiates between κύριοι[Gen 19:2] ('lords', vocative plural) andκύριε[Gen 19:18] ('lord', vocative singular), even if the Hebrew verbal form,נא-אדני‬ (na-adoni), is exactly the same in both cases.
Endnotes and references
The Heavenly and Earthly Trinities on the site of the National Gallery in London.
"Definition of trinity in English". Oxford Dictionaries - English.
The Family Bible Encyclopedia (1972). p. 3790.
See Geddes, Leonard (1911). "Person". In Herbermann, Charles. Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton.
Definition of the Fourth Lateran Council quoted in Catechism of the Catholic Church §253.
"Frank Sheed, ''Theology and Sanity''". Ignatiusinsight.com. Retrieved 3 November 2013.
"Understanding the Trinity". Credoindeum.org. 16 May 2012. Archived from the original on 25 January 2016. Retrieved 16 Aug 2016.
"Baltimore Catechism, No. 1, Lesson 7". Quizlet.com. Retrieved 3 November 2013.
CCC §254; Latin: Est Pater, qui generat, et Filius, qui gignitur, et Spiritus Sanctus, qui procedit (DS §804).
Coppens, Charles, S.J. (1903). A Systematic Study of the Catholic Religion. St. Louis: B. HERDER. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016.
CCC §253–267: "The dogma of the Holy Trinity".
"Genesis 1:1-3". Biblia.com. Faithlife. Retrieved 21 July 2017.
Younker, Randall W. "Crucial Questions of Interpretation in Genesis 1" (PDF). Biblical Research Institute. Biblical Research Institute General Conference of Seventh-day Adventists. Retrieved 21 July 2017.
"John 1:1-4". Biblia.com. Faithlife. Retrieved 21 July 2017.
"Trinity, doctrine of" in The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (Oxford University Press 2005 ISBN 978-0-192-80290-3)
"Trinity word not in Scripture". carm.org. 24 November 2008.
McGrath Alister E. Christian Theology: An Introduction Blackwell, Oxford (2001) p.321
McGrath, Alister E. Christian Theology: An Introduction Blackwell, Oxford (2001) p.324
Kelly, J.N.D. Early Christian Doctrines A & G Black (1965) p. 88
"Godhead". www.mormon.org. Retrieved 2017-01-15.
"Lewis and Short: ''trinus''". Perseus.tufts.edu. Retrieved 2 January 2012.
Liddell & Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon. entry for Τριάς, retrieved 19 December 2006
Theophilus of Antioch, To Autolycus, II.XV (retrieved on 19 December 2006).
W.Fulton in the "Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics"
Aboud, Ibrahim (Fall 2005). Theandros an online Journal of Orthodox Christian Theology and Philosophy. 3, number 1. Archived from the original on 24 July 2008.
"Against Praxeas, chapter 3". Ccel.org. 1 June 2005. Retrieved 19 March 2018.
Against Praxeas, chapter 2 and in other chapters
History of the Doctrine of the Trinity. Accessed 15 September 2007.
See Elizabeth Lev, "Dimming the Pauline Spotlight; Jubilee Fruits", 2009 Archived 14 September 2012 at the Wayback Machine.
"Orthodox Outlet for Dogmatic Enquiries: On God". Oodegr.com. Retrieved 2 January 2012.
Eusebius of Caesarea, Church History iii.36
"St. Ignatius of Antioch to the Magnesians (Shorter Recension), Roberts-Donaldson translation". Earlychristianwritings.com. Retrieved 3 November 2013.
"First Apology, LXI". Ccel.org. 13 July 2005. Retrieved 3 November 2013.
Theophilus, Apologia ad Autolycum, Book II, Chapter 15
Tertullian Against Praxeas
Mulhern, Philip F. (1967) "Trinity, Holy, Devotion", in New Catholic encyclopedia. Prepared by an editorial staff at the Catholic University of America. New York:McGraw-Hill, 14. 306
Ramelli, Llaria. "Origen's Anti-Subordinationism and Its Heritage in the Nicene and Cappadocian Line". jstor.org. Brill. Retrieved 31 May 2017.
Barnard, L.W. "The Antecedents of Arius". jstor.org. Retrieved 1 June 2017.
Bingham, Jeffrey, "HT200 Class Notes", Dallas Theological Seminary, (2004).
The Encyclopedia Americana (1956), Vol. XXVII, p. 294L
Nouveau Dictionnaire Universel (Paris, 1865–1870), Vol. 2, p. 1467.
"Catholic Encyclopedia: article:''Paul of Samosata''". Newadvent.org. 1 February 1911. Retrieved 2 January 2012.
Chadwick, Henry. The Early Church Pelican/Penguin (1967) p.87
"Arianism" in Cross, F.L. & Livingstone, E.A. (eds) The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (1974)
"Creeds of Christendom, with a History and Critical notes. Volume I. The History of Creeds. - Christian Classics Ethereal Library". www.ccel.org.
Anderson, Michael. "The Nicaeno-Constantinopolitan Creed". www.creeds.net.
"Second Creed of Sirmium or "The Blasphemy of Sirmium"". www.fourthcentury.com. Retrieved 2017-03-09.
"Athanasius, Bishop of Alexanria, Theologian, Doctor". Justus.anglican.org. Retrieved 2 January 2012.
"Athanasius: De Decretis or Defence of the Nicene Definition, Introduction, 19". Tertullian.org. 6 August 2004. Retrieved 2 January 2012.
"Trinity". Britannica Encyclopaedia of World Religions. Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica. 2006.
On Athanasius, Oxford Classical Dictionary, Edited by Simon Hornblower and Antony Spawforth. Third edition. Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.
Gregory of Nazianzus, Orations 40.41
Mulhern, 306.
Mulhern, p.306
Wolfgang Vondey, Pentecostalism, A Guide for the Perplexed (London; New Delhi; New York; Sydney: Bloomsbury, 2013), 78.
7:1, 3 online
Epistle to the Philippians, 2:13 online
On Baptism 8:6 online, Against Praxeas, 26:2 online
Against Noetus, 1:14 online
Seventh Council of Carthage online
A Sectional Confession of Faith, 13:2 online
Kittel, 3:108.
Stagg, Frank. New Testament Theology. Broadman Press, 1962. ISBN 978-0-8054-1613-8, pp. 38 ff.
Grudem, Wayne A. 1994. Systematic theology an introduction to biblical doctrine. Leicester, England: Inter-Varsity Press. Page 226.
"Athanasian Creed". Ccel.org. Retrieved 2 January 2012.
Barth, Karl, and Geoffrey William Bromiley. 1975. The doctrine of the word of God prolegomena to church dogmatics, being volume I, 1. Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark. Pages 348–9.
Thomas, and Anton Charles Pegis. 1997. Basic writings of Saint Thomas Aquinas. Indianapolis, Indiana: Hackett Pub. Pages 307–9.
For 'person', seeRichard De Smet, A Short History of the Person, available in Brahman and Person: Essays by Richard De Smet, ed. Ivo Coelho (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2010).
"NPNF2-09. Hilary of Poitiers, John of Damascus | Christian Classics Ethereal Library". Ccel.org. 13 July 2005. Retrieved 2 January 2012.
Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity: The Greek and the Latin Traditions regarding the Procession of the Holy Spirit (scanned image of the English translation on L'Osservatore Romano of 20 September 1995); also text with Greek letters transliterated and text omitting two sentences at the start of the paragraph that it presents as beginning with "The Western tradition expresses first ..."
CCC §236.
Phillip Cary, Priscilla Papers Vol. 20, No. 4, Autumn 2006
"Basil the Great, De Spiritu Sancto, NPNF, Vol 8". Ccel.org. 13 July 2005. Retrieved 2 January 2012.
Athanasius, 3.29 (p. 409)
Basil "Letters", NPNF, Vol 8, 189.7 (p. 32)
Sauvage, George. "Appropriation." The Catholic Encyclopedia Vol. 1. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1907. 20 October 2016
Olsen, Roger E., "Is there hierarchy in the Trinity?", Patheos, December 8, 2011
Warfield, Benjamin B., "Trinity", § 20, The Question of Subordination, The International Standard Bible Encyclopaedia, Vol. 5, (James Orr, ed.), Howard-Severance Company, 1915, pp.3020-3021
Rubinstein, Richard. When Jesus Became God, The Struggle to Define Christianity During the Last Days of Rome. p. 64.
Harvey, Susan Ashbrook; Hunter, David G. (4 September 2008). "The Oxford Handbook of Early Christian Studies". OUP Oxford – via Google Books.
"What Was Debated at the Council of Nicea?".
Philip Schaff, History of the Christian Church. Volume III. Nicene and Post-Nicene Christianity, fifth edition revised, §27
Rusch, William G. (1980). "Introduction". In Rusch, William G. The Trinitarian Controversy. Minneapolis: Fortress Press(subscription required). p. 2.
"Neither the word Trinity nor the explicit doctrine appears in the New Testament ... the New Testament established the basis for the doctrine of the Trinity"(Encyclopædia Britannica Online: article Trinity).
"Trinity". Britannica.com. Retrieved 2 January 2012.
The Oxford Companion to the Bible (ed. Bruce Metzger and Michael Coogan) 1993, p. 782–3.
McGrath, Alister E.Understanding the Trinity. Zondervan, 9789 ISBN 0-310-29681-1
Harris, Stephen L. Understanding the Bible. Mayfield Publishing: 2000. pp. 427–428
See, for instance, the note in 1 Jn 5:7–8.
Bruce M. Metzger, The Text of the New Testament: Its Transmission, Corruption, and Restoration, 2d ed. Oxford University, 1968 p.101
"The Presentation of Jesus in John's Gospel". Bbc.co.uk. Retrieved 2 January 2012.
Brown, Raymond E. The Anchor Bible: The Gospel According to John (XIII–XXI), pp. 1026, 1032
Hoskyns, Edwyn Clement (ed Davey F.N.) The Fourth Gospel Faber & Faber, 1947 p.142 commenting on "without him was not any thing made that was made."[John 1:3]
St. Paul helps us understand truths about Jesus Archived 26 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
Simonetti, Manlio. "Matthew 14–28." New Testament Volume 1b, Ancient Christian Commentary on Scripture. Intervarsity Press, 2002. ISBN 978-0-8308-1469-5
St. Augustine of Hippo,De Trinitate, Book I, Chapter 3.
St. Basil the Great,On the Holy Spirit Chapter 16.
St. Basil the Great, On the Holy Spirit Chapter 19.
St. Basil the Great, On the Holy Spirit Chapter 21.
"Catholic Encyclopedia: article ''Pneumatomachi''". Newadvent.org. 1 June 1911. Retrieved 2 January 2012.
New Jerusalem Bible, Standard Edition published 1985, introductions and notes are a translation of those that appear in La Bible de Jerusalem—revised edition 1973, Bombay 2002; footnote to Joh 14:16.
Zondervan NIV (New International Version) Study Bible, 2002, Grand Rapids, Michigan, USA; footnote to Joh 14:17.
Trinity—see "3 The Holy Spirit As a Person".
See Book of Wisdom#Messianic interpretation by Christians
The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (Oxford University Press, 2005 ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3), article Trinity, doctrine of the
"Catholic Encyclopedia: article ''The Blessed Trinity''". Newadvent.org. 1 October 1912. Retrieved 2 January 2012.
"Encyclopedia of Religion", Vol. 14, p.9360, on Trinity
Gregory Nazianzen, Orations, 31.26
For the two chapters as a single text, see Letellier, Robert. Day in Mamre, night in Sodom: Abraham and Lot in Genesis 18 and 19. Brill Publishers: 1995.ISBN 978-90-04-10250-7 pp.37ff. Web: 9 January 2010
"Francis Watson, Abraham's Visitors, The Journal of Scriptural Reasoning, Number 2.3, September 2002". Etext.lib.virginia.edu. Archived from the original on 29 June 2011. Retrieved 2 January 2012.
Swedenborg, Emanuel. Heavenly Arcana, 1749–58. Rotch Edition. New York: Houghton, Mifflin and Company, 1907, in the Divine Revelation of the New Jerusalem (2012), n. 2149, 2156, 2218.
Swedenborg, n. 2319–2320.
Swedenborg, n. 10617.
The Trinity in the Old Testament Archived 4 May 2003 at Archive.is
Larry W. Hurtado, Lord Jesus Christ: Devotion to Jesus in Earliest Christianity. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing, 2005 ISBN 0-8028-3167-2 pp. 573–578
"Baker's Evangelical Dictionary of Biblical Theology: ''Angel of the Lord''". Studylight.org. Retrieved 2 January 2012.
Aurelius, Marcus (1964). Meditations. London: Penguin Books. p. 25. ISBN 0-14044140-9. ISBN 978-0-140-44140-6.
See below and G Schiller, Iconography of Christian Art, Vol. I, 1971, Vol II, 1972, (English trans from German), Lund Humphries, London, figs I;5–16 & passim, ISBN 0-85331-270-2 and ISBN 0-85331-324-5
Cartlidge, David R., and Elliott, J.K.. Art and the Christian Apocrypha, pp. 69–72 (illustrating examples), Routledge, 2001, ISBN 0-415-23392-5, ISBN 978-0-415-23392-7, Google books
G Schiller, Iconography of Christian Art, Vol. II, 1972, (English trans from German), Lund Humphries, London, figs I;5–16 & passim, ISBN 0-85331-270-2 and ISBN 0-85331-324-5, pp. 122–124 and figs 409–414
G Schiller, Iconography of Christian Art, Vol. II, 1972, (English trans from German), Lund Humphries, London, figs I;5–16 & passim, ISBN 0-85331-270-2 and ISBN 0-85331-324-5, pp. 219–224 and figs 768–804
Potts, Albert M. The World's Eye. University Press of Kentucky. pp. 68–78.
von Harnack, Adolf (1 March 1894). "History of Dogma". Retrieved 15 June 2007. [In the 2nd century,] Jesus was either regarded as the man whom God hath chosen, in whom the Deity or the Spirit of God dwelt, and who, after being tested, was adopted by God and invested with dominion, (Adoptionist Christology); or Jesus was regarded as a heavenly spiritual being (the highest after God) who took flesh, and again returned to heaven after the completion of his work on earth (pneumatic Christology)
Cross, F.L. (1958). The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church. London: OUP, p. 81.
Glassé, Cyril; Smith, Huston (2003). The New Encyclopedia of Islam. Rowman Altamira. pp. 239–241. ISBN 0759101906.
Encyclopedia of the Qur'an. Thomas, David. 2006. Volume V: Trinity.
Quran 3:79–80 (Translated by Shakir)
Quran 112:1–4 (Translated by Shakir)
Quran 112:1–4 (Translated by Shakir)
Quran 5:73 (Translated by Shakir)
Quran 5:116 (Translated by Shakir)
David Thomas, Trinity, Encyclopedia of the Qur'an
Mun'im Sirry (1 May 2014). Scriptural Polemics: The Qur'an and Other Religions. Oxford University Press.
S. Griffith: Christians and Christianity.
Edward Hulmes: Qur'an and the Bible, The; entry in the Oxford Companion to the Bible.
Mun'im Sirry (1 May 2014). Scriptural Polemics: The Qur'an and Other Religions. Oxford University Press. p. 47.
The concept of Trinity is incompatible with Judaism:
Response - Reference Center - FAQ - Proof Texts - Trinity (Jews for Judaism)
The Trinity in the Shema? by Rabbi Singer (outreachjudaism.org)
The Doctrine of the Trinity (religionfacts.com)
Other references
Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy Online, Trinity
Further reading
Emery, Gilles, O.P.; Levering, Matthew, eds. (2012). The Oxford Handbook of the Trinity. ISBN 978-0199557813.
Holmes, Stephen R. (2012). The Quest for the Trinity: The Doctrine of God in Scripture, History and Modernity. ISBN 9780830839865.
Dolezal, James. "Trinity, Simplicity and the Status of God's Personal Relations", International Journal of Systematic Theology 16 (1) (2014): 79–98.
Fiddes, Paul, Participating in God : a pastoral doctrine of the Trinity (London: Darton, Longman, & Todd, 2000).
Johnson, Thomas K., "What Difference Does the Trinity Make?" (Bonn: Culture and Science Publ., 2009).
La Due, William J., The Trinity guide to the Trinity (Continuum International Publishing Group, 2003 ISBN 1-56338-395-0, ISBN 978-1-56338-395-3).
Letham, Robert (2004). The Holy Trinity : In Scripture, History, Theology, and Worship. ISBN 9780875520001.
O'Collins, Gerald (1999). The Tripersonal God: Understanding and Interpreting the Trinity. ISBN 9780809138876.
Olson, Roger E.; Hall, Christopher A. (2002). The Trinity. ISBN 9780802848277.
Phan, Peter C., ed. (2011). The Cambridge Companion to the Trinity. ISBN 978-0-521-87739-8.
So, Damon W. K., Jesus' Revelation of His Father: A Narrative-Conceptual Study of the Trinity with Special Reference to Karl Barth. (Milton Keynes: Paternoster, 2006). ISBN 1-84227-323-X.
Hillar, Marian, From Logos to Trinity. The Evolution of Religious Beliefs from Pythagoras to Tertullian. (Cambridge University Press, 2012).
Tuggy, Dale (Summer 2014), "Trinity (History of Trinitarian Doctrines)", Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Feazell, J. and Morrison, M. (2013). You're Included — Complete List of Trinitarian Conversations, 108 Interviews With 25 Theologians: Ray S. Anderson, Douglas A. Campbell, Elmer Colyer, Gerrit Scott Dawson, Cathy Deddo, Gary W. Deddo, Gordon Fee, Trevor Hart, George Hunsinger, Christian Kettler, C. Baxter Kruger, John E. McKenna, Jeff McSwain, Steve McVey, Paul Louis Metzger, Paul Molnar, Roger Newell, Cherith Fee Nordling, Robin Parry, Andrew Purves, Andrew Root, Alan Torrance, David Torrance, Robert T. Walker, William Paul Young. 4th ed. ebook Grace Communion International, pp. 1–1279.
Webb, Eugene, In Search of The Triune God: The Christian Paths of East and West (Columbia, MO: University of Missouri Press, 2014)
External links
Trinity Entry at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
A Formulation and Defense of the Doctrine of the Trinity A brief historical survey of patristic Trinitarian thought
Doctrine of the Trinity
Trinity Article at Theopedia
Eastern Orthodox Trinitarian Theology
Doctrine of the Trinity Reading Room: Extensive collection of on-line sources on the Trinity (Tyndale Seminary)
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Trinity&oldid=839703163"
This page was last edited on 5 May 2018, at 03:59.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Jesus
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jesus
Cefalù Pantocrator retouched.jpg
Christ Pantocrator mosaic in Byzantine style, from the Cefalù Cathedral, Sicily, c. 1130
Born	c. 4 BC[a]
Judea, Roman Empire[5]
Died	c. AD 30 / 33[b]
(aged 33–36)
Jerusalem, Judea, Roman Empire
Cause of death	Crucifixion[c]
Home town	Nazareth, Galilee[11]
Parent(s)
Mary Joseph[d]
Family	James, Joseph (Joses), Judas (Jude), and Simon and unnamed sisters
Jesus[e] (c. 4 BC – c. AD 30 / 33), also referred to as Jesus of Nazareth and Jesus Christ,[f] was a first-century Jewish preacher and religious leader.[12] He is the central figure of Christianity. Most Christians believe him to be the incarnation of God the Son and the awaited Messiah (Christ) prophesied in the Old Testament.[13][14]
Virtually all modern scholars of antiquity agree that Jesus existed historically,[g] although the quest for the historical Jesus has produced little agreement on the historical reliability of the Gospels and on how closely the Jesus portrayed in the Bible reflects the historical Jesus.[21][h][i] Jesus was a Galilean Jew[12] who was baptized by John the Baptist and subsequently began his own ministry, preaching his message orally[24] and often being referred to as "rabbi".[25] Jesus debated with fellow Jews on how to best follow God, engaged in healings, taught in parables and gathered followers.[26][27] He was arrested and tried by the Jewish authorities,[28] and turned over to the Roman government, and was subsequently crucified on the order of Pontius Pilate, the Roman prefect.[26] After his death, his followers believed he rose from the dead, and the community they formed eventually became the early Church.[29]
The birth of Jesus is celebrated annually on December 25 (or various dates in January by some eastern churches) as a holiday known as Christmas. His crucifixion is honored on Good Friday, and his resurrection is celebrated on Easter. The widely used calendar era "AD", from the Latin anno Domini ("in the year of the Lord"), and the alternative "CE", are based on the approximate birth date of Jesus.[30][j]
Christian doctrines include the beliefs that Jesus was conceived by the Holy Spirit, was born of a virgin named Mary, performed miracles, founded the Church, died by crucifixion as a sacrifice to achieve atonement, rose from the dead, and ascended into Heaven, from where he will return.[32] Most Christians believe Jesus enables people to be reconciled to God. The Nicene Creed asserts that Jesus will judge the living and the dead[33] either before or after their bodily resurrection,[34][35][36] an event tied to the Second Coming of Jesus in Christian eschatology.[37] The great majority of Christians worship Jesus as the incarnation of God the Son, the second of three persons of a Divine Trinity. A minority of Christian denominations reject Trinitarianism, wholly or partly, as non-scriptural.
Jesus also figures in non-Christian religions and new religious movements. In Islam, Jesus (commonly transliterated as Isa) is considered one of God's important prophets and the Messiah.[38][39][40] Muslims believe Jesus was a bringer of scripture and was born of a virgin, but was not the Son of God. The Quran states that Jesus himself never claimed divinity.[41] Most Muslims do not believe that he was crucified, but believe that he was physically raised into Heaven by God. In contrast, Rabbinic Judaism rejects the belief that Jesus was the awaited Messiah, arguing that he did not fulfill Messianic prophecies. Jewish views on Jesus are that he was neither divine nor resurrected.[42]
Contents
1	Etymology
2	Life and teachings in the New Testament
2.1	Canonical gospels
2.2	Genealogy and nativity
2.3	Early life, family, and profession
2.4	Baptism and temptation
2.5	Public ministry
2.6	Passion Week
2.7	Resurrection and Ascension
3	Early Christianity
4	Historical views
4.1	Judea and Galilee in the 1st century
4.2	Sources
4.3	Chronology
4.4	Historicity of events
4.5	Portraits of Jesus
4.6	Language, ethnicity, and appearance
4.7	Christ myth theory
5	Perspectives
5.1	Christian
5.2	Jewish
5.3	Islamic
5.4	Bahá'í
5.5	Other
6	Artistic depictions
7	Associated relics
8	See also
9	Notes
10	References
10.1	Citations
10.2	Bibliography
11	External links
Etymology
Counter-clockwise from top-right: Hebrew, Aramaic, Greek, Latin, and English transcriptions of the name Jesus
A typical Jew in Jesus' time had only one name, sometimes supplemented with the father's name or the individual's hometown.[43] Thus, in the New Testament, Jesus is commonly referred to as "Jesus of Nazareth"[k] (e.g., Mark 10:47).[44] Jesus' neighbors in Nazareth refer to him as "the carpenter, the son of Mary and brother of James and Joses and Judas and Simon" (Mark 6:3),[45] "the carpenter's son" (Matthew 13:55),[46] or "Joseph's son" (Luke 4:22).[47] In John, the disciple Philip refers to him as "Jesus son of Joseph from Nazareth" (John 1:45).[48]
The name Jesus is derived from the Latin Iesus, a transliteration of the Greek Ἰησοῦς (Iesous).[49] The Greek form is a rendering of the Hebrew ישוע‎ (Yeshua), a variant of the earlier name יהושע‎ (Yehoshua), or in English, "Joshua".[50][51][52] The name Yeshua appears to have been in use in Judea at the time of the birth of Jesus.[53] The 1st-century works of historian Flavius Josephus, who wrote in Koine Greek, the same language as that of the New Testament,[54] refer to at least twenty different people with the name Jesus (i.e. Ἰησοῦς).[55] The etymology of Jesus' name in the context of the New Testament is generally given as "Yahweh is salvation".[56]
Since early Christianity, Christians have commonly referred to Jesus as "Jesus Christ".[57] The word Christ was a title or office ("the Christ"), not a given name.[58][59] It derives from the Greek Χριστός (Christos),[49][60] a translation of the Hebrew moschiach (משיח) meaning "anointed", and is usually transliterated into English as "Messiah".[61][62] In biblical Judaism, sacred oil was used to anoint certain exceptionally holy people and objects as part of their religious investiture (see Leviticus 8:10–12 and Exodus 30:29).
Christians of the time designated Jesus as "the Christ" because they believed him to be the Messiah, whose arrival is prophesied in the Hebrew Bible and Old Testament. In postbiblical usage, Christ became viewed as a name—one part of "Jesus Christ". The term "Christian" (meaning a follower of Christ) has been in use since the 1st century.[63]
Life and teachings in the New Testament
A four-page papyrus manuscript, which is torn in many places
A 3rd-century Greek papyrus of the Gospel of Luke
Canonical gospels
The four canonical gospels (Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John) are the foremost sources for the life and message of Jesus.[43] However, other parts of the New Testament also include references to key episodes in his life, such as the Last Supper in 1 Corinthians 11:23.[64][65][66] Acts of the Apostles (Acts 10:37–38 and Acts 19) refers to the early ministry of Jesus and its anticipation by John the Baptist.[67][68] Acts 1:1–11 says more about the Ascension of Jesus (also mentioned in 1 Timothy 3:16) than the canonical gospels do.[69] In the undisputed Pauline letters, which were written earlier than the gospels, the words or instructions of Jesus are cited several times (1 Corinthians 7:10–11, 9:14, 11:23–25, 2 Corinthians 12:9).[l]
Some early Christian groups had separate descriptions of the life and teachings of Jesus that are not included in the New Testament. These include the Gospels of Thomas, Peter, and Judas, the Apocryphon of James, and many other apocryphal writings. Most scholars conclude that these are written much later and are less reliable accounts than the canonical gospels.[71][72][73]
The canonical gospels are four accounts, each written by a different author. The authors of the gospels are all anonymous, attributed by tradition to the four evangelists, each with close ties to Jesus:[74] Mark by John Mark, an associate of Peter;[75] Matthew by one of Jesus' disciples;[74] Luke by a companion of Paul mentioned in a few epistles;[74] and John by another of Jesus' disciples,[74] the "beloved disciple".[76]
One important aspect of the study of the gospels is the literary genre under which they fall. Genre "is a key convention guiding both the composition and the interpretation of writings".[77] Whether the gospel authors set out to write novels, myths, histories, or biographies has a tremendous impact on how they ought to be interpreted. Some recent studies suggest that the genre of the gospels ought to be situated within the realm of ancient biography.[78][79][80] Although not without critics,[81] the position that the gospels are a type of ancient biography is the consensus among scholars today.[82][83]
Not everything contained in the New Testament gospels is considered to be historically reliable.[84] Views range from their being inerrant descriptions of the life of Jesus[85] to their providing little historical information about his life beyond the basics.[86][87] According to a broad scholarly consensus, the Synoptic Gospels (Matthew, Mark, and Luke), and not John, are the most reliable sources of information about Jesus.[88][89][43]
According to the Marcan priority, the first to be written was the Gospel of Mark (written AD 60–75), followed by the Gospel of Matthew (AD 65–85), the Gospel of Luke (AD 65–95), and the Gospel of John (AD 75–100).[90] Furthermore, most scholars agree that the authors of Matthew and Luke used Mark as a source when writing their gospels. Matthew and Luke also share some content not found in Mark. To explain this, many scholars believe that in addition to Mark, another source (commonly called the "Q source") was used by the two authors.[91]
Matthew, Mark, and Luke are known as the Synoptic Gospels, from the Greek σύν (syn "together") and ὄψις (opsis "view").[92][93][94] They are similar in content, narrative arrangement, language and paragraph structure.[92][93] Scholars generally agree that it is impossible to find any direct literary relationship between the Synoptic Gospels and the Gospel of John.[95] While the flow of some events (such as Jesus' baptism, transfiguration, crucifixion and interactions with the apostles) are shared among the Synoptic Gospels, incidents such as the transfiguration do not appear in John, which also differs on other matters, such as the Cleansing of the Temple.[96]
Jesus in the Synoptic Gospels	Jesus in the Gospel of John
Begins with Jesus' baptism or birth to a virgin.[74]	Begins with creation, with no birth story.[74]
Baptized by John the Baptist.[74]	Baptism presupposed but not mentioned.[74]
Teaches in parables and aphorisms.[74]	Teaches in long, involved discourses.[74]
Teaches primarily about the Kingdom of God, little about himself.[74]	Teaches primarily and extensively about himself.[74]
Speaks up for the poor and oppressed.[74]	Says little to nothing about the poor or oppressed.[74]
Exorcises demons.[97]	Does not exorcise demons.[97]
Attends one Passover festival.[98]	Attends three or four Passover festivals.[98]
Cleansing the Temple occurs late.[74]	Cleansing the Temple is early.[74]
Jesus ushers in a new covenant with a last supper.[74]	Jesus washes the disciples' feet.[74]
The Synoptics emphasize different aspects of Jesus. In Mark, Jesus is the Son of God whose mighty works demonstrate the presence of God's Kingdom.[75] He is a tireless wonder worker, the servant of both God and man.[99] This short gospel records few of Jesus' words or teachings.[75] The Gospel of Matthew emphasizes that Jesus is the fulfillment of God's will as revealed in the Old Testament, and he is the Lord of the Church.[100] He is the "Son of David", a "king", and the Messiah.[99][13][14] Luke presents Jesus as the divine-human savior who shows compassion to the needy.[101] He is the friend of sinners and outcasts, come to seek and save the lost.[99] This gospel includes Jesus' most beloved parables, such as the Good Samaritan and the Prodigal Son.[101]
The prologue to the Gospel of John identifies Jesus as an incarnation of the divine Word (Logos).[102] As the Word, Jesus was eternally present with God, active in all creation, and the source of humanity's moral and spiritual nature.[102] Jesus is not only greater than any past human prophet but greater than any prophet could be. He not only speaks God's Word; he is God's Word.[103] In the Gospel of John, Jesus reveals his divine role publicly. Here he is the Bread of Life, the Light of the World, the True Vine and more.[99]
In general, the authors of the New Testament showed little interest in an absolute chronology of Jesus or in synchronizing the episodes of his life with the secular history of the age.[104] As stated in John 21:25, the gospels do not claim to provide an exhaustive list of the events in the life of Jesus.[105] The accounts were primarily written as theological documents in the context of early Christianity, with timelines as a secondary consideration.[106] In this respect, it is noteworthy that the Gospels devote about one third of their text to the last week of the life of Jesus in Jerusalem, referred to as the Passion.[107] Although the gospels do not provide enough details to satisfy the demands of modern historians regarding exact dates, it is possible to draw from them a general picture of the life story of Jesus.[84][104][106]
Genealogy and nativity
Jesus was Jewish,[12] born by Mary, wife of Joseph (Matthew 1, Luke 2). Matthew and Luke each offer a genealogy of Jesus. Matthew traces Jesus' ancestry to Abraham through David.[108] Luke traces Jesus' ancestry through Adam to God.[109] The lists are identical between Abraham and David, but differ radically from that point.
A Nativity scene; men and animals surround Mary and newborn Jesus, who are covered in light
Adoration of the Shepherds (1622) by Gerard van Honthorst
Matthew and Luke each describe Jesus' nativity (or birth), especially that Jesus was born by a virgin Mary in Bethlehem in fulfillment of prophecy. Luke's account emphasizes events before the birth of Jesus and centers on Mary, while Matthew's mostly covers those after the birth and centers on Joseph.[110][111][112] Both accounts state that Jesus was born to Joseph and Mary, his betrothed, in Bethlehem, and both support the doctrine of the virgin birth of Jesus, according to which Jesus was miraculously conceived by the Holy Spirit in Mary's womb when she was still a virgin.[113][114][115]
In Matthew, Joseph is troubled because Mary, his betrothed, is pregnant (Matthew 1:19–20), but in the first of Joseph's three dreams an angel assures him not to be afraid to take Mary as his wife, because her child was conceived by the Holy Spirit.[116] In Matthew 2:1–12, wise men or Magi from the East bring gifts to the young Jesus as the King of the Jews. Herod the Great hears of Jesus' birth and, wanting him killed, orders the murders of male infants in Bethlehem. But an angel warns Joseph in his second dream, and the family flees to Egypt—later to return and settle in Nazareth.[116][117][118]
In Luke 1:31–38, Mary learns from the angel Gabriel that she will conceive and bear a child called Jesus through the action of the Holy Spirit.[111][113] When Mary is due to give birth, she and Joseph travel from Nazareth to Joseph's ancestral home in Bethlehem to register in the census ordered by Caesar Augustus. While there Mary gives birth to Jesus, and as they have found no room in the inn, she places the newborn in a manger (Luke 2:1–7). An angel announces the birth to some shepherds, who go to Bethlehem to see Jesus, and subsequently spread the news abroad (Luke 2:8–20). After the presentation of Jesus at the Temple, Joseph, Mary and Jesus return to Nazareth.[111][113]
Early life, family, and profession
12-year-old Jesus in the temple, depicted by Heinrich Hofmann, 1884
Jesus' childhood home is identified in the gospels of Luke and Matthew as the town of Nazareth in Galilee, where he lived with his family. Although Joseph appears in descriptions of Jesus' childhood, no mention is made of him thereafter.[119] His other family members—his mother, Mary, his brothers James, Joses (or Joseph), Judas and Simon and his unnamed sisters—are mentioned in the gospels and other sources.[120]
The Gospel of Mark reports that Jesus comes into conflict with his neighbors and family.[121] Jesus' mother and brothers come to get him (Mark 3:31–35) because people are saying that he is crazy (Mark 3:21). Jesus responds that his followers are his true family. In John, Mary follows Jesus to his crucifixion, and he expresses concern over her well-being (John 19:25–27).
Jesus is called a τέκτων (tektōn) in Mark 6:3, traditionally understood as carpenter but could cover makers of objects in various materials, including builders.[122][123] The gospels indicate that Jesus could read, paraphrase, and debate scripture, but this does not necessarily mean that he received formal scribal training.[124]
When Jesus is presented in the temple per Jewish Law, a man named Simeon says to Mary and Joseph that Jesus "shall stand as a sign of contradiction, while a sword will pierce your own soul. Then the secret thoughts of many will come to light" (Luke 2:28–35). When Jesus goes missing, they find him in the temple sitting among the teachers, listening to them and asking questions, and the people are amazed at his understanding and answers; Mary scolds Jesus for going missing, to which Jesus replies that he must "be in his father's house" (Luke 2:41–52).
Baptism and temptation
The Baptism of Christ (1895) by Almeida Júnior
The Synoptic accounts of Jesus' baptism are all preceded by information about John the Baptist.[125][126][127] They show John preaching penance and repentance for the remission of sins and encouraging the giving of alms to the poor (Luke 3:11) as he baptizes people in the area of the Jordan River around Perea and foretells (Luke 3:16) the arrival of someone "more powerful" than he.[128][129] Later, Jesus identifies John as "the Elijah who was to come" (Matthew 11:14, Mark 9:13–14), the prophet who was expected to arrive before the "great and terrible day of the Lord" (Malachi 4:5). Likewise, Luke says that John had the spirit and power of Elijah (Luke 1:17).
In Mark, John baptizes Jesus, and as he comes out of the water he sees the Holy Spirit descending to him like a dove and he hears a voice from heaven declaring him to be God's Son (Mark 1:9–11). This is one of two events described in the gospels where a voice from Heaven calls Jesus "Son", the other being the Transfiguration.[130][131] The spirit then drives him into the wilderness where he is tempted by Satan (Mark 1:12–13). Jesus then begins his ministry after John's arrest (Mark 1:14). Jesus' baptism in Matthew is similar. Here, before Jesus' baptism, John protests, saying, "I need to be baptized by you" (Matthew 3:14). Jesus instructs him to carry on with the baptism "to fulfill all righteousness" (Matthew 3:15). Matthew also details the three temptations that Satan offers Jesus in the wilderness (Matthew 4:3–11). In Luke, the Holy Spirit descends as a dove after everyone has been baptized and Jesus is praying (Luke 3:21–22). John implicitly recognizes Jesus from prison after sending his followers to ask about him (Luke 7:18–23). Jesus' baptism and temptation serve as preparation for his public ministry.[132]
The Gospel of John leaves out Jesus' baptism and temptation.[133] Here, John the Baptist testifies that he saw the Spirit descend on Jesus (John 1:32).[129][134] John publicly proclaims Jesus as the sacrificial Lamb of God, and some of John's followers become disciples of Jesus.[89] In this Gospel, John denies that he is Elijah (John 1:21). Before John is imprisoned, Jesus leads his followers to baptize disciples as well (John 3:22–24), and they baptize more people than John (John 4:1).
Public ministry
Jesus sits atop a mount, preaching to a crowd
A 19th-century painting depicting the Sermon on the Mount, by Carl Bloch
The Synoptics depict two distinct geographical settings in Jesus' ministry. The first takes place north of Judea, in Galilee, where Jesus conducts a successful ministry; and the second shows Jesus rejected and killed when he travels to Jerusalem.[25] Often referred to as "rabbi",[25] Jesus preaches his message orally.[24] Notably, Jesus forbids those who recognize him as the Messiah to speak of it, including people he heals and demons he exorcises (see Messianic Secret).[135]
John depicts Jesus' ministry as largely taking place in and around Jerusalem, rather than in Galilee; and Jesus' divine identity is openly proclaimed and immediately recognized.[103]
Scholars divide the ministry of Jesus into several stages. The Galilean ministry begins when Jesus returns to Galilee from the Judaean Desert after rebuffing the temptation of Satan. Jesus preaches around Galilee, and in Matthew 4:18–20, his first disciples, who will eventually form the core of the early Church, encounter him and begin to travel with him.[127][136] This period includes the Sermon on the Mount, one of Jesus' major discourses,[136][137] as well as the calming of the storm, the feeding of the 5,000, walking on water and a number of other miracles and parables.[138] It ends with the Confession of Peter and the Transfiguration.[139][140]
As Jesus travels towards Jerusalem, in the Perean ministry, he returns to the area where he was baptized, about a third of the way down from the Sea of Galilee along the Jordan River (John 10:40–42).[141][142] The final ministry in Jerusalem begins with Jesus' triumphal entry into the city on Palm Sunday.[143] In the Synoptic Gospels, during that week Jesus drives the money changers from the Second Temple and Judas bargains to betray him. This period culminates in the Last Supper and the Farewell Discourse.[125][143][144]
Disciples and followers
Jesus talking to his 12 disciples, as depicted by James Tissot
Near the beginning of his ministry, Jesus appoints twelve apostles. In Matthew and Mark, despite Jesus only briefly requesting that they join him, Jesus' first four apostles, who were fishermen, are described as immediately consenting, and abandoning their nets and boats to do so (Matthew 4:18–22, Mark 1:16–20). In John, Jesus' first two apostles were disciples of John the Baptist. The Baptist sees Jesus and calls him the Lamb of God; the two hear this and follow Jesus.[145][146] In addition to the Twelve Apostles, the opening of the passage of the Sermon on the Plain identifies a much larger group of people as disciples (Luke 6:17). Also, in Luke 10:1–16 Jesus sends seventy or seventy-two of his followers in pairs to prepare towns for his prospective visit. They are instructed to accept hospitality, heal the sick and spread the word that the Kingdom of God is coming.[147]
In Mark, the disciples are notably obtuse. They fail to understand Jesus' miracles (Mark 4:35–41, Mark 6:52), his parables (Mark 4:13), or what "rising from the dead" would mean (Mark 9:9–10). When Jesus is later arrested, they desert him.[135]
Teachings and miracles
Christ and the Rich Young Ruler by Heinrich Hofmann, 1889
In the Synoptics, Jesus teaches extensively, often in parables,[148] about the Kingdom of God (or, in Matthew, the Kingdom of Heaven). The Kingdom is described as both imminent (Mark 1:15) and already present in the ministry of Jesus (Luke 17:21). Jesus promises inclusion in the Kingdom for those who accept his message (Mark 10:13–27). Jesus talks of the "Son of Man," an apocalyptic figure who would come to gather the chosen.[43]
Jesus calls people to repent their sins and to devote themselves completely to God.[43] Jesus tells his followers to adhere to Jewish law, although he is perceived by some to have broken the law himself, for example regarding the Sabbath.[43] When asked what the greatest commandment is, Jesus replies: "You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind ... And a second is like it: 'You shall love your neighbor as yourself" (Matthew 22:37–39). Other ethical teachings of Jesus include loving your enemies, refraining from hatred and lust, turning the other cheek, and forgiving people who have sinned against you (Matthew 5–7).[149]
John's Gospel presents the teachings of Jesus not merely as his own preaching, but as divine revelation. John the Baptist, for example, states in John 3:34: "He whom God has sent speaks the words of God, for he gives the Spirit without measure." In John 7:16 Jesus says, "My teaching is not mine but his who sent me." He asserts the same thing in John 14:10: "Do you not believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in me? The words that I say to you I do not speak on my own; but the Father who dwells in me does his works."[150][151]
Jesus, his head surrounded by a halo, puts his hands on a leper, thereby healing him
Jesus cleansing a leper, medieval mosaic from the Monreale Cathedral
Approximately thirty parables form about one third of Jesus' recorded teachings.[150][152] The parables appear within longer sermons and at other places in the narrative.[153] They often contain symbolism, and usually relate the physical world to the spiritual.[154][155] Common themes in these tales include the kindness and generosity of God and the perils of transgression.[156] Some of his parables, such as the Prodigal Son (Luke 15:11–32), are relatively simple, while others, such as the Growing Seed (Mark 4:26–29), are sophisticated, profound and abstruse.[157] When asked by his disciples about why he speaks in parables to the people, Jesus replies that the chosen disciples have been given to "know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven", unlike the rest of their people, "For the one who has will be given more and he will have in abundance. But the one who does not have will be deprived even more.", going on to say that the majority of their generation have grown "dull hearts" and thus are unable to understand (Matthew 13:10–17).
In the gospel accounts, Jesus devotes a large portion of his ministry performing miracles, especially healings.[158] The miracles can be classified into two main categories: healing miracles and nature miracles.[159] The healing miracles include cures for physical ailments, exorcisms,[97][160] and resurrections of the dead.[161] The nature miracles show Jesus' power over nature, and include turning water into wine, walking on water, and calming a storm, among others. Jesus states that his miracles are from a divine source. When Jesus' opponents suddenly accuse him of performing exorcisms by the power of Beelzebul, the prince of demons, Jesus counters that he performs them by the "Spirit of God" (Matthew 12:28) or "finger of God", arguing that all logic suggests that Satan would not let his demons assist the Children of God because it would divide Satan's house and bring his kingdom to desolation; furthermore, he asks his opponents that if he exorcises by Beel'zebub, "by whom do your sons cast them out?"(Luke 11:20).[162][163] In Matthew 12:31–32, he goes on to say that while all manner of sin, "even insults against God" or "insults against the son of man", shall be forgiven, whoever insults goodness (or "The Holy Spirit") shall never be forgiven; he/she carries the guilt of his/her sin forever.
In John, Jesus' miracles are described as "signs", performed to prove his mission and divinity.[164][165] However, in the Synoptics, when asked by some teachers of the Law and some Pharisees to give miraculous signs to prove his authority, Jesus refuses,[164] saying that no sign shall come to corrupt and evil people except the sign of the prophet Jonah. Also, in the Synoptic Gospels, the crowds regularly respond to Jesus' miracles with awe and press on him to heal their sick. In John's Gospel, Jesus is presented as unpressured by the crowds, who often respond to his miracles with trust and faith.[166] One characteristic shared among all miracles of Jesus in the gospel accounts is that he performed them freely and never requested or accepted any form of payment.[167] The gospel episodes that include descriptions of the miracles of Jesus also often include teachings, and the miracles themselves involve an element of teaching.[168][169] Many of the miracles teach the importance of faith. In the cleansing of ten lepers and the raising of Jairus' daughter, for instance, the beneficiaries are told that their healing was due to their faith.[170][171]
Proclamation as Christ and Transfiguration
The Transfiguration of Jesus, depicted by Carl Bloch, 19th century
At about the middle of each of the three Synoptic Gospels are two significant events: the Confession of Peter and the Transfiguration of Jesus.[140][172][130][131] These two events are not mentioned in the Gospel of John.[173]
In his Confession, Peter tells Jesus, "You are the Messiah, the Son of the living God."[174][175][176] Jesus affirms that Peter's confession is divinely revealed truth.[177][178] After the confession, Jesus tells his disciples about his upcoming death and resurrection (Matthew 16:21, Mark 8:31, Luke 9:22)
In the Transfiguration (Matthew 17:1–9, Mark 9:2–8, and Luke 9:28–36),[130][131][140] Jesus takes Peter and two other apostles up an unnamed mountain, where "he was transfigured before them, and his face shone like the sun, and his clothes became dazzling white."[179] A bright cloud appears around them, and a voice from the cloud says, "This is my Son, the Beloved; with him I am well pleased; listen to him" (Matthew 17:1–9).[130]
Passion Week
The description of the last week of the life of Jesus (often called Passion Week) occupies about one third of the narrative in the canonical gospels,[107] starting with Jesus' triumphal entry into Jerusalem and ending with his Crucifixion.[125][143]
Activities in Jerusalem
Jesus, riding a donkey colt, rides towards Jerusalem. A large crowd greets him outside the walls.
A painting of Jesus' final entry into Jerusalem, by Jean-Léon Gérôme, 1897
In the Synoptics, the last week in Jerusalem is the conclusion of the journey through Perea and Judea that Jesus began in Galilee.[143] Jesus rides a young donkey into Jerusalem, reflecting the tale of the Messiah's Donkey, an oracle from the Book of Zechariah in which the Jews' humble king enters Jerusalem this way (Zechariah 9:9).[75] People along the way lay cloaks and small branches of trees (known as palm fronds) in front of him and sing part of Psalms 118:25–26.[180][181][182]
Jesus next expels the money changers from the Second Temple, accusing them of turning it into a den of thieves through their commercial activities. Jesus then prophesies about the coming destruction, including false prophets, wars, earthquakes, celestial disorders, persecution of the faithful, the appearance of an "abomination of desolation," and unendurable tribulations (Mark 13:1–23). The mysterious "Son of Man," he says, will dispatch angels to gather the faithful from all parts of the earth (Mark 13:24–27). Jesus warns that these wonders will occur in the lifetimes of the hearers (Mark 13:28–32).[135] In John, the Cleansing of the Temple occurs at the beginning of Jesus' ministry instead of at the end (John 2:13–16).[103]
Jesus comes into conflict with the Jewish elders, such as when they question his authority and when he criticizes them and calls them hypocrites.[180][182] Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve apostles, secretly strikes a bargain with the Jewish elders, agreeing to betray Jesus to them for 30 silver coins.[183][184]
The Gospel of John recounts of two other feasts in which Jesus taught in Jerusalem before the Passion Week (John 7:1–10:42).[121] In Bethany, a village near Jerusalem, Jesus raises Lazarus from the dead. This potent sign[103] increases the tension with authorities,[143] who conspire to kill him (John 11).[121] Mary of Bethany anoints Jesus' feet, foreshadowing his entombment.[185] Jesus then makes his Messianic entry into Jerusalem.[121] The cheering crowds greeting Jesus as he enters Jerusalem add to the animosity between him and the establishment.[143] In John, Jesus has already cleansed the Second Temple during an earlier Passover visit to Jerusalem. John next recounts Jesus' Last Supper with his disciples.[121]
Last Supper
A depiction of the Last Supper. Jesus sits in the center, his apostles gathered around on either side of him.
The Last Supper, depicted by Juan de Juanes, c. 1562
The Last Supper is the final meal that Jesus shares with his 12 apostles in Jerusalem before his crucifixion. The Last Supper is mentioned in all four canonical gospels; Paul's First Epistle to the Corinthians (11:23–26) also refers to it.[65][66][186] During the meal, Jesus predicts that one of his apostles will betray him.[187] Despite each Apostle's assertion that he would not betray him, Jesus reiterates that the betrayer would be one of those present. Matthew 26:23–25 and John 13:26–27 specifically identify Judas as the traitor.[65][66][187]
In the Synoptics, Jesus takes bread, breaks it, and gives it to the disciples, saying, "This is my body, which is given for you". He then has them all drink from a cup, saying, "This cup that is poured out for you is the new covenant in my blood" (Luke 22:19–20).[65][188] The Christian sacrament or ordinance of the Eucharist is based on these events.[189] Although the Gospel of John does not include a description of the bread-and-wine ritual during the Last Supper, most scholars agree that John 6:22–59 (the Bread of Life Discourse) has a eucharistic character and resonates with the institution narratives in the Synoptic Gospels and in the Pauline writings on the Last Supper.[190]
In all four gospels, Jesus predicts that Peter will deny knowledge of him three times before the rooster crows the next morning.[191][192] In Luke and John, the prediction is made during the Supper (Luke 22:34, John 22:34). In Matthew and Mark, the prediction is made after the Supper; Jesus also predicts that all his disciples will desert him (Matthew 26:31–34, Mark 14:27–30).[193] The Gospel of John provides the only account of Jesus washing his disciples' feet after the meal.[117] John also includes a long sermon by Jesus, preparing his disciples (now without Judas) for his departure. Chapters 14–17 of the Gospel of John are known as the Farewell Discourse and are a significant source of Christological content.[194][195]
Agony in the Garden, betrayal, and arrest
Judas kisses Jesus, and soldiers rush to seize the latter.
A depiction of the kiss of Judas and arrest of Jesus, by Caravaggio, c. 1602
In the Synoptics, Jesus and his disciples go to the garden Gethsemane, where Jesus prays to be spared his coming ordeal. Then Judas comes with an armed mob, sent by the chief priests, scribes and elders. He kisses Jesus to identify him to the crowd, which then arrests Jesus. In an attempt to stop them, an unnamed disciple of Jesus uses a sword to cut off the ear of a man in the crowd. After Jesus' arrest, his disciples go into hiding, and Peter, when questioned, thrice denies knowing Jesus. After the third denial, Peter hears the rooster crow and recalls Jesus' prediction about his denial. Peter then weeps bitterly.[193][135][191]
In John (18:1–11), Jesus does not pray to be spared his crucifixion, as the gospel portrays him as scarcely touched by such human weakness.[196] The people who arrest him are Roman soldiers and Temple guards.[197] Instead of being betrayed by a kiss, Jesus proclaims his identity, and when he does, the soldiers and officers fall to the ground. The gospel identifies Peter as the disciple who used the sword, and Jesus rebukes him for it.
Trials by the Sanhedrin, Herod, and Pilate
After his arrest, Jesus is taken to the Sanhedrin, a Jewish judicial body.[198] The gospel accounts differ on the details of the trials.[199] In Matthew 26:57, Mark 14:53 and Luke 22:54, Jesus is taken to the house of the high priest, Caiaphas, where he is mocked and beaten that night. Early the next morning, the chief priests and scribes lead Jesus away into their council.[200][201][202] John 18:12–14 states that Jesus is first taken to Annas, Caiaphas' father-in-law, and then to the high priest.[200][201][202]
A depiction of Jesus' public trial
Ecce homo! Antonio Ciseri's 1871 depiction of Pontius Pilate presenting Jesus to the public
During the trials Jesus speaks very little, mounts no defense, and gives very infrequent and indirect answers to the priests' questions, prompting an officer to slap him. In Matthew 26:62 Jesus' unresponsiveness leads Caiaphas to ask him, "Have you no answer?"[200][201][202] In Mark 14:61 the high priest then asks Jesus, "Are you the Messiah, the Son of the Blessed One?" Jesus replies, "I am", and then predicts the coming of the Son of Man.[43] This provokes Caiaphas to tear his own robe in anger and to accuse Jesus of blasphemy. In Matthew and Luke, Jesus' answer is more ambiguous:[43][203] in Matthew 26:64 he responds, "You have said so", and in Luke 22:70 he says, "You say that I am".[204][205]
The Jewish elders take Jesus to Pilate's Court and ask the Roman governor, Pontius Pilate, to judge and condemn Jesus, accusing him of claiming to be the King of the Jews.[202] The use of the word "king" is central to the discussion between Jesus and Pilate. In John 18:36 Jesus states, "My kingdom is not from this world", but he does not unequivocally deny being the King of the Jews.[206][207] In Luke 23:7–15 Pilate realizes that Jesus is a Galilean, and thus comes under the jurisdiction of Herod Antipas, the Tetrarch of Galilee and Perea.[208][209] Pilate sends Jesus to Herod to be tried,[210] but Jesus says almost nothing in response to Herod's questions. Herod and his soldiers mock Jesus, put an expensive robe on him to make him look like a king, and return him to Pilate,[208] who then calls together the Jewish elders and announces that he has "not found this man guilty".[210]
Observing a Passover custom of the time, Pilate allows one prisoner chosen by the crowd to be released. He gives the people a choice between Jesus and a murderer called Barabbas (בר-אבא or Bar-abbâ, "son of the father", from the common given name Abba: 'father').[211] Persuaded by the elders (Matthew 27:20), the mob chooses to release Barabbas and crucify Jesus.[212] Pilate writes a sign in Hebrew, Latin, and Greek that reads "Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews" (abbreviated as INRI in depictions) to be affixed to Jesus' cross (John 19:19–20),[213] then scourges Jesus and sends him to be crucified. The soldiers place a Crown of Thorns on Jesus' head and ridicule him as the King of the Jews. They beat and taunt him before taking him to Calvary,[214] also called Golgotha, for crucifixion.[200][202][215]
Crucifixion and entombment
A depiction of Jesus on the cross
Pietro Perugino's depiction of the Crucifixion as Stabat Mater, 1482
Jesus' crucifixion is described in all four canonical gospels. After the trials, Jesus is led to Calvary carrying his cross; the route traditionally thought to have been taken is known as the Via Dolorosa. The three Synoptic Gospels indicate that Simon of Cyrene assists him, having been compelled by the Romans to do so.[216][217] In Luke 23:27–28 Jesus tells the women in the multitude of people following him not to weep for him but for themselves and their children.[216] At Calvary, Jesus is offered a concoction usually offered as a painkiller. According to Matthew and Mark, he refuses it.[216][217]
The soldiers then crucify Jesus and cast lots for his clothes. Above Jesus' head on the cross is Pilate's inscription, "Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews." Soldiers and passersby mock him about it. Two convicted thieves are crucified along with Jesus. In Matthew and Mark, both thieves mock Jesus. In Luke, one of them rebukes Jesus, while the other defends him.[216][218][219] Jesus tells the latter: "today you will be with me in Paradise" (Luke 23:43). In John, Mary, the mother of Jesus, and the beloved disciple were at the crucifixion. Jesus tells the beloved disciple to take of his mother (John 19:26–27).
The Roman soldiers break the two thieves' legs (a procedure designed to hasten death in a crucifixion), but they do not break those of Jesus, as he is already dead (John 19:33). In John 19:34, one soldier pierces Jesus' side with a lance, and blood and water flow out.[218] In the Synoptics, when Jesus dies, the heavy curtain at the Temple is torn. In Matthew 27:51–54, an earthquake breaks open tombs. In Matthew and Mark, terrified by the events, a Roman centurion states that Jesus was the Son of God.[216][220]
On the same day, Joseph of Arimathea, with Pilate's permission and with Nicodemus' help, removes Jesus' body from the cross, wraps him in a clean cloth, and buries him in his new rock-hewn tomb.[216] In Matthew 27:62–66, on the following day the chief Jewish priests ask Pilate for the tomb to be secured, and with Pilate's permission the priests place seals on the large stone covering the entrance.[216][221]
Resurrection and Ascension
Appearance of Jesus Christ to Maria Magdalena (1835) by Alexander Andreyevich Ivanov
Mary Magdalene (alone in John, but accompanied by other women in the Synoptics) goes to Jesus' tomb on Sunday morning and is surprised to find it empty. Despite Jesus' teaching, the disciples had not understood that Jesus would rise again.[222]
In Matthew, there are guards at the tomb. An angel descends from heaven, and opens the tomb. The guards faint from fear. Jesus appears to Mary Magdalene and "the other Mary" after they visited the tomb. Jesus then appears to the eleven remaining disciples in Galilee and commissions them to baptize all nations in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit.[117]
In Mark, Salome and Mary, mother of James are with Mary Magdalene (Mark 16:1). In the tomb, a young man in a white robe (an angel) tells them that Jesus will meet his disciples in Galilee, as he had told them (referring to Mark 14:28).[75]
In Luke, Mary and various other women meet two angels at the tomb, but the eleven disciples do not believe their story (Luke 25:1–12). Jesus appears to two of his followers in Emmaus. He also makes an appearance to Peter. Jesus then appears that same day to his disciples in Jerusalem (Luke 24:13–43). Although he appears and vanishes mysteriously, he also eats and lets them touch him to prove that he is not a spirit. He repeats his command to bring his teaching to all nations (Luke 24:51).[223]
In John, Mary is alone at first, but Peter and the beloved disciple come and see the tomb as well. Jesus then appears to Mary at the tomb. He later appears to the disciples, breathes on them, and gives them the power to forgive and retain sins. In a second visit to disciples, he proves to a doubting disciple ("Doubting Thomas") that he is flesh and blood.[103] The disciples return to Galilee, where Jesus makes another appearance. He performs a miracle known as the catch of 153 fish at the Sea of Galilee, after which Jesus encourages Peter to serve his followers.[69][224]
Jesus' Ascension into Heaven is described in Luke 24:50–53, Acts 1:1–11 and mentioned in 1 Timothy 3:16. In the Acts of the Apostles, forty days after the Resurrection, as the disciples look on, "he was lifted up, and a cloud took him out of their sight". 1 Peter 3:22 states that Jesus has "gone into heaven and is at the right hand of God".[69]
The Acts of the Apostles describes several appearances of Jesus after his Ascension. In Acts 7:55, Stephen gazes into heaven and sees "Jesus standing at the right hand of God" just before his death.[225] On the road to Damascus, the Apostle Paul is converted to Christianity after seeing a blinding light and hearing a voice saying, "I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting" (Acts 9:5). In Acts 9:10–18, Jesus instructs Ananias of Damascus in a vision to heal Paul.[226] The Book of Revelation includes a revelation from Jesus concerning the last days.[227]
Early Christianity
After Jesus's life, his followers, as described in the first chapters of the Acts of the Apostles, were all Jews either by birth or conversion, for which the biblical term "proselyte" is used,[228] and referred to by historians as Jewish Christians. The early Gospel message was spread orally, probably in Aramaic,[229] but almost immediately also in Greek.[230] The New Testament's Acts of the Apostles and Epistle to the Galatians record that the first Christian community was centered in Jerusalem and its leaders included Peter, James, the brother of Jesus, and John the Apostle.[231]
After the conversion of Paul the Apostle, he claimed the title of "Apostle to the Gentiles". Paul's influence on Christian thinking is said to be more significant than that of any other New Testament author.[232] By the end of the 1st century, Christianity began to be recognized internally and externally as a separate religion from Judaism which itself was refined and developed further in the centuries after the destruction of the Second Temple.[233]
Numerous quotations in the New Testament and other Christian writings of the first centuries, indicate that early Christians generally used and revered the Hebrew Bible (the Tanakh) as religious text, mostly in the Greek (Septuagint) or Aramaic (Targum) translations.[234]
Early Christians wrote many religious works, including the canon of the New Testament. The canonical texts, which have become the main sources used by historials to try to understand the historical Jesus and sacred texts within Christianity, were probably written before 120 AD.[235]
Historical views
Prior to the Enlightenment, the gospels were usually regarded as accurate historical accounts, but since then scholars have emerged who question the reliability of the gospels and draw a distinction between the Jesus described in the gospels and the Jesus of history.[236] Since the 18th century, three separate scholarly quests for the historical Jesus have taken place, each with distinct characteristics and based on different research criteria, which were often developed during the quest that applied them.[97][237] While there is widespread scholarly agreement on the existence of Jesus,[g] and a basic consensus on the general outline of his life,[m] the portraits of Jesus constructed by various scholars often differ from each other, and from the image portrayed in the gospel accounts.[239][240]
Approaches to the historical reconstruction of the life of Jesus have varied from the "maximalist" approaches of the 19th century, in which the gospel accounts were accepted as reliable evidence wherever it is possible, to the "minimalist" approaches of the early 20th century, where hardly anything about Jesus was accepted as historical.[241] In the 1950s, as the second quest for the historical Jesus gathered pace, the minimalist approaches faded away, and in the 21st century, minimalists such as Price are a very small minority.[242][243] Although a belief in the inerrancy of the gospels cannot be supported historically, many scholars since the 1980s have held that, beyond the few facts considered to be historically certain, certain other elements of Jesus' life are "historically probable".[242][244][245] Modern scholarly research on the historical Jesus thus focuses on identifying the most probable elements.[246][247]
Judea and Galilee in the 1st century
A map. See description
Judea, Galilee and neighboring areas at the time of Jesus
In AD 6, Judea, Idumea, and Samaria were transformed from a client kingdom of the Roman Empire into an imperial province, also called Judea. A Roman prefect, rather than a client king, ruled the land. The prefect ruled from Caesarea Maritima, leaving Jerusalem to be run by the High Priest of Israel. As an exception, the prefect came to Jerusalem during religious festivals, when religious and patriotic enthusiasm sometimes inspired unrest or uprisings. Gentile lands surrounded the Jewish territories of Judea and Galilee, but Roman law and practice allowed Jews to remain separate legally and culturally. Galilee was evidently prosperous, and poverty was limited enough that it did not threaten the social order.[43]
This was the era of Hellenistic Judaism, which combined Jewish religious tradition with elements of Hellenistic Greek culture. Until the fall of the Roman Empire and the Muslim conquests of the Eastern Mediterranean, the main centers of Hellenistic Judaism were Alexandria (Egypt) and Antioch (now Southern Turkey), the two main Greek urban settlements of the Middle East and North Africa area, both founded at the end of the 4th century BCE in the wake of the conquests of Alexander the Great. Hellenistic Judaism also existed in Jerusalem during the Second Temple Period, where there was conflict between Hellenizers and traditionalists (sometimes called Judaizers). The Hebrew Bible was translated from Biblical Hebrew and Biblical Aramaic into Jewish Koiné Greek; the Targum translations into Aramaic were also generated during this era, both to due to the decline of knowledge of Hebrew.[248]
Jews based their faith and religious practice on the Torah, five books said to have been given by God to Moses. The three prominent religious parties were the Pharisees, the Essenes, and the Sadducees. Together these parties represented only a small fraction of the population. Most Jews looked forward to a time that God would deliver them from their pagan rulers, possibly through war against the Romans.[43]
Sources
A 1640 edition of the works of Josephus, a 1st-century Roman-Jewish historian who referred to Jesus[249]
New Testament scholars face a formidable challenge when they analyze the canonical Gospels.[250] The Gospels are not biographies in the modern sense, and the authors explain Jesus' theological significance and recount his public ministry while omitting many details of his life.[250] The reports of supernatural events associated with Jesus' death and resurrection make the challenge even more difficult.[250] Scholars regard the gospels as compromised sources of information because the writers were trying to glorify Jesus.[84] Even so, the sources for Jesus' life are better than sources scholars have for the life of Alexander the Great.[84] Scholars use a number of criteria, such as the criterion of independent attestation, the criterion of coherence, and the criterion of discontinuity to judge the historicity of events.[251] The historicity of an event also depends on the reliability of the source; indeed, the gospels are not independent nor consistent records of Jesus' life. Mark, which is most likely the earliest written gospel, has been considered for many decades the most historically accurate.[252] John, the latest written gospel, differs considerably from the Synoptic Gospels, and thus is generally considered less reliable, although more and more scholars now also recognize that it may contain a core of older material as historically valuable as the Synoptic tradition or even more so.[253]
The non-canonical Gospel of Thomas might be an independent witness to many of Jesus' parables and aphorisms. For example, Thomas confirms that Jesus blessed the poor and that this saying circulated independently before being combined with similar sayings in the Q source.[254] Other select non-canonical Christian texts may also have value for historical Jesus research.[89]
Early non-Christian sources that attest to the historical existence of Jesus include the works of the historians Josephus and Tacitus.[n][249][256] Josephus scholar Louis Feldman has stated that "few have doubted the genuineness" of Josephus' reference to Jesus in book 20 of the Antiquities of the Jews, and it is disputed only by a small number of scholars.[257][258] Tacitus referred to Christ and his execution by Pilate in book 15 of his work Annals. Scholars generally consider Tacitus's reference to the execution of Jesus to be both authentic and of historical value as an independent Roman source.[259]
Non-Christian sources are valuable in two ways. First, they show that even neutral or hostile parties never evince any doubt that Jesus actually existed. Second, they present a rough picture of Jesus that is compatible with that found in the Christian sources: that Jesus was a teacher, had a reputation as a miracle worker, had a brother James, and died a violent death.[11]
Archeology helps scholars better understand Jesus' social world.[260] Recent archeological work, for example, indicates that Capernaum, a city important in Jesus' ministry, was poor and small, without even a forum or an agora.[261][262] This archaeological discovery resonates well with the scholarly view that Jesus advocated reciprocal sharing among the destitute in that area of Galilee.[261]
Chronology
Jesus was a Galilean Jew,[12] born around the beginning of the 1st century, who died in 30 or 33 AD in Judea.[6] The general scholarly consensus is that Jesus was a contemporary of John the Baptist and was crucified by the Roman governor Pontius Pilate, who held office from 26 to 36 AD.[26]
The gospels offer several clues concerning the year of Jesus' birth. Matthew 2:1 associates the birth of Jesus with the reign of Herod the Great, who died around 4 BC, and Luke 1:5 mentions that Herod was on the throne shortly before the birth of Jesus,[263][264] although this gospel also associates the birth with the Census of Quirinius which took place ten years later.[265][266] Luke 3:23 states that Jesus was "about thirty years old" at the start of his ministry, which according to Acts 10:37–38 was preceded by John the Baptist's ministry, itself recorded in Luke 3:1–2 to have begun in the 15th year of Tiberius' reign (28 or 29 AD).[264][267] By collating the gospel accounts with historical data and using various other methods, most scholars arrive at a date of birth between 6 and 4 BC for Jesus,[267][268] but some propose estimates that lie in a wider range.[o]
The years of Jesus' ministry have been estimated using several different approaches.[269][270] One of these applies the reference in Luke 3:1–2, Acts 10:37–38 and the dates of Tiberius' reign, which are well known, to give a date of around 28–29 AD for the start of Jesus' ministry.[271] Another approach uses the statement about the temple in John 2:13–20, which asserts that the temple in Jerusalem was in its 46th year of construction at the start of Jesus' ministry, together with Josephus' statement that the temple's reconstruction was started by Herod the Great in the 18th year of his reign, to estimate a date around 27–29 AD.[269][272] A further method uses the date of the death of John the Baptist and the marriage of Herod Antipas to Herodias, based on the writings of Josephus, and correlates it with Matthew 14:4 and Mark 6:18.[273][274] Given that most scholars date the marriage of Herod and Herodias as AD 28–35, this yields a date about 28–29 AD.[270]
A number of approaches have been used to estimate the year of the crucifixion of Jesus. Most scholars agree that he died in 30 or 33 AD.[6][275] The gospels state that the event occurred during the prefecture of Pilate, the Roman governor of Judea from 26 to 36 AD.[276][277][278] The date for the conversion of Paul (estimated to be 33–36 AD) acts as an upper bound for the date of Crucifixion. The dates for Paul's conversion and ministry can be determined by analyzing the Pauline epistles and the Acts of the Apostles.[279][280] Astronomers have tried to estimate the precise date of the Crucifixion by analyzing lunar motion and calculating historic dates of Passover, a festival based on the lunisolar Hebrew calendar. The most widely accepted dates derived from this method are April 7, 30 AD, and April 3, 33 AD (both Julian).[281]
Historicity of events
A white statue of a man
An apparently old document
Roman senator and historian Tacitus wrote of the crucifixion of Christ (Jesus) in the Annals, a history of the Roman Empire during the 1st century.
Scholars have reached a limited consensus on the basics of Jesus' life.[282]
Family
Many scholars agree that Joseph, Jesus' father, died by the time Jesus began his ministry. Joseph is not mentioned at all in the gospels during Jesus' ministry. Joseph's death would explain why in Mark 6:3, Jesus' neighbors refer to Jesus as the "son of Mary" (sons were usually identified by their fathers).[283]
According to Theissen and Merz, it is common for extraordinary charismatic leaders, such as Jesus, to come into conflict with their ordinary families.[284] In Mark, Jesus' family comes to get him, fearing that he is mad (Mark 3:20–34), and this account is likely historical because early Christians would not have invented it.[285] After Jesus' death, many members of his family joined the Christian movement.[284] Jesus' brother James became a leader of the Jerusalem Church.[286]
Géza Vermes says that the doctrine of the virgin birth of Jesus arose from theological development rather than from historical events.[287] Despite the widely held view that the authors of the Synoptic Gospels drew upon each other (the so-called synoptic problem), other scholars take it as significant that the virgin birth is attested by two separate gospels, Matthew and Luke.[288][289][290][291][292][293]
According to E. P. Sanders, the birth narratives in Matthew and Luke are the clearest case of invention in the Gospel narratives of Jesus' life. Both accounts have Jesus born in Bethlehem, in accordance with Jewish salvation history, and both have him growing up in Nazareth. But Sanders points that the two Gospels report completely different and irreconcilable explanations for how that happened. Luke's account of a census in which everyone returned to their ancestral cities is not plausible. Matthew's account is more plausible, but the story reads as though it was invented to identify Jesus as like a new Moses, and the historian Josephus reports Herod the Great's brutality without ever mentioning that he massacred little boys.[294]
Sanders says that the genealogies of Jesus are based not on historical information but on the authors' desire to show that Jesus was the universal Jewish savior.[108] In any event, once the doctrine of the virgin birth of Jesus became established, that tradition superseded the earlier tradition that he was descended from David through Joseph.[295] Luke reports that Jesus was a blood relation of John the Baptist, but scholars generally consider this connection to be invented.[108][296]
Baptism
Most modern scholars consider Jesus' baptism to be a definite historical fact, along with his crucifixion.[7] Theologian James D. G. Dunn states that they "command almost universal assent" and "rank so high on the 'almost impossible to doubt or deny' scale of historical facts" that they are often the starting points for the study of the historical Jesus.[7] Scholars adduce the criterion of embarrassment, saying that early Christians would not have invented a baptism that might imply that Jesus committed sins and wanted to repent.[297][298] According to Theissen and Merz, Jesus was inspired by John the Baptist and took over from him many elements of his teaching.[299]
Ministry in Galilee
Most scholars hold that Jesus lived in Galilee and Judea and did not preach or study elsewhere.[300] They agree that Jesus debated with Jewish authorities on the subject of God, performed some healings, taught in parables and gathered followers.[26] Jesus' Jewish critics considered his ministry to be scandalous because he feasted with sinners, fraternized with women, and allowed his followers to pluck grain on the Sabbath.[74] According to Sanders, it is not plausible that disagreements over how to interpret the Law of Moses and the Sabbath would have led Jewish authorities to want Jesus killed.[301]
According to Ehrman, Jesus taught that a coming kingdom was everyone's proper focus, not anything in this life.[302] He taught about the Jewish Law, seeking its true meaning, sometimes in opposition to other traditions.[303] Jesus put love at the center of the Law, and following that Law was an apocalyptic necessity.[303] His ethical teachings called for forgiveness, not judging others, loving enemies, and caring for the poor.[304] Funk and Hoover note that typical of Jesus were paradoxical or surprising turns of phrase, such as advising one, when struck on the cheek, to offer the other cheek to be struck as well (Luke 6:29).[305]
The Gospels portray Jesus teaching in well-defined sessions, such as Matthew's Sermon on the Mount or Luke's parallel Sermon on the Plain. According to Gerd Theissen and Annette Merz, these teaching sessions include authentic teachings of Jesus, but the scenes were invented by the respective evangelists to frame these teachings, which had originally been recorded without context.[89] While Jesus' miracles fit within the social context of antiquity, he defined them differently. First, he attributed them to the faith of those healed. Second, he connected them to end times prophecy.[306]
Jesus chose twelve disciples [307] (the "Twelve"), evidently as an apocalyptic message.[308] All three Synoptics mention the Twelve, although the names on Luke's list vary from those in Mark and Matthew, suggesting that Christians were not certain who all the disciples were.[308] The 12 disciples might have represented the twelve original tribes of Israel, which would be restored once God's rule was instituted.[308] The disciples were reportedly meant to be the rulers of the tribes in the coming Kingdom (Matthew 19:28, Luke 22:30).[308] According to Bart Ehrman, Jesus' promise that the Twelve would rule is historical, because the Twelve included Judas Iscariot. In Ehrman's view, no Christians would have invented a line from Jesus, promising rulership to the disciple who betrayed him.[308] In Mark, the disciples play hardly any role other than a negative one. While others sometimes respond to Jesus with complete faith, his disciples are puzzled and doubtful.[309] They serve as a foil to Jesus and to other characters.[309] The failings of the disciples are probably exaggerated in Mark, and the disciples make a better showing in Matthew and Luke.[309]
Sanders says that Jesus' mission was not about repentance, although he acknowledges that this opinion is unpopular. He argues that repentance appears as a strong theme only in Luke, that repentance was John the Baptist's message, and that Jesus' ministry would not have been scandalous if the sinners he ate with had been repentant.[310] According to Theissen and Merz, Jesus taught that God was generously giving people an opportunity to repent.[311]
Role
Jesus taught that an apocalyptic figure, the "Son of Man", would soon come on clouds of glory to gather the elect, or chosen ones (Mark 13:24–27, Matthew 24:29–31, Luke 21:25–28). He referred to himself as a "son of man" in the colloquial sense of "a person", but scholars do not know whether he also meant himself when he referred to the heavenly "Son of Man". Paul the Apostle and other early Christians interpreted the "Son of Man" as the risen Jesus.[43]
The title Christ, or Messiah, indicates that Jesus' followers believed him to be the anointed heir of King David, whom some Jews expected to save Israel. The Gospels refer to him not only as a Messiah but in the absolute form as "the Messiah" or, equivalently, "the Christ". In early Judaism, this absolute form of the title is not found, but only phrases such as "his Messiah". The tradition is ambiguous enough to leave room for debate as to whether Jesus defined his eschatological role as that of the Messiah.[312] The Jewish messianic tradition included many different forms, some of them focused on a Messiah figure and others not.[313] Based on the Christian tradition, Gerd Theissen advances the hypothesis that Jesus saw himself in messianic terms but did not claim the title "Messiah".[313] Bart Ehrman argues that Jesus did consider himself to be the Messiah, albeit in the sense that he would be the king of the new political order that God would usher in,[314] not in the sense that most people today think of the term.[315]
Passover and crucifixion in Jerusalem
Around AD 30, Jesus and his followers traveled from Galilee to Jerusalem to observe Passover.[307] Jesus caused a disturbance in the Second Temple,[28] which was the center of Jewish religious and civil authority. Sanders associates it with Jesus' prophecy that the Temple would be totally demolished.[316] Jesus had a last meal with his disciples, which is the origin of the Christian sacrament of bread and wine. Jesus' words are recorded in the Synoptics and in Paul's First Epistle to the Corinthians. The differences in the accounts cannot be completely reconciled, and it is impossible to know what Jesus intended, but in general the meal seems to point forward to the coming Kingdom. Jesus probably expected to be killed, and he may have hoped that God would intervene.[317]
The Gospels say that Jesus was betrayed to the authorities by a disciple, and many scholars consider this report to be highly reliable.[133] He was executed on the orders of Pontius Pilate, the Roman prefect of Judaea.[28] Pilate most likely saw Jesus' reference to the Kingdom of God as a threat to Roman authority and worked with the Temple elites to have Jesus executed.[318] The Sadducean high-priestly leaders of the Temple more plausibly had Jesus executed for political reasons than for his teaching.[133] They may have regarded him as a threat to stability, especially after he caused a disturbance at the Second Temple.[133][42] Other factors, such as Jesus' triumphal entry into Jerusalem, may have contributed to this decision.[319] Most scholars consider Jesus' crucifixion to be factual, because early Christians would not have invented the painful death of their leader.[7][320]
After crucifixion
The Resurrection of Christ from a 16th-century copy of La Passion de Nostre Seigneur
After Jesus' death, his followers said he rose from the dead, although exact details of their experiences are unclear. Some of those who claimed to have witnessed Jesus' resurrection later died for their belief, which indicates that their beliefs were likely genuine.[321] According to Sanders, the Gospel reports contradict each other, which, according to him, suggests competition among those claiming to have seen him first rather than deliberate fraud.[322] On the other hand, L. Michael White suggests that inconsistencies in the Gospels reflect differences in the agendas of their unknown authors.[282] The followers of Jesus formed a community to wait for his return and the founding of his kingdom.[28]
Portraits of Jesus
Modern research on the historical Jesus has not led to a unified picture of the historical figure, partly because of the variety of academic traditions represented by the scholars.[323] Given the scarcity of historical sources, it is generally difficult for any scholar to construct a portrait of Jesus that can be considered historically valid beyond the basic elements of his life.[86][87] The portraits of Jesus constructed in these quests often differ from each other, and from the image portrayed in the gospels.[324][325]
Jesus is seen as the founder of, in the words of Sanders, a '"renewal movement within Judaism." One of the criteria used to discern historical details in the "third quest" is the criterion of plausibility, relative to Jesus' Jewish context and to his influence on Christianity. A disagreement in contemporary research is whether Jesus was apocalyptic. Most scholars conclude that he was an apocalyptic preacher, like John the Baptist and Paul the Apostle. In contrast, certain prominent North American scholars, such as Burton Mack and John Dominic Crossan, advocate for a non-eschatological Jesus, one who is more of a Cynic sage than an apocalyptic preacher.[326] In addition to portraying Jesus as an apocalyptic prophet, a charismatic healer or a cynic philosopher, some scholars portray him as the true Messiah or an egalitarian prophet of social change.[327][328] However, the attributes described in the portraits sometimes overlap, and scholars who differ on some attributes sometimes agree on others.[329]
Since the 18th century, scholars have occasionally put forth that Jesus was a political national messiah, but the evidence for this portrait is negligible. Likewise, the proposal that Jesus was a Zealot does not fit with the earliest strata of the Synoptic tradition.[133]
Language, ethnicity, and appearance
Twelve depictions of Jesus from around the world
The representation of the ethnicity of Jesus has been influenced by cultural settings.[330][331]
Jesus grew up in Galilee and much of his ministry took place there.[332] The languages spoken in Galilee and Judea during the 1st century AD include Jewish Palestinian Aramaic, Hebrew, and Greek, with Aramaic being predominant.[333][334] There is substantial consensus that Jesus gave most of his teachings in Aramaic.[335]
Modern scholars agree that Jesus was a Jew of 1st-century Palestine.[336][337] Ioudaios in New Testament Greek[p] is a term which in the contemporary context may refer to religion (Second Temple Judaism), ethnicity (of Judea), or both.[339][340][341] In a review of the state of modern scholarship, Amy-Jill Levine writes that the entire question of ethnicity is "fraught with difficulty", and that "beyond recognizing that 'Jesus was Jewish', rarely does the scholarship address what being 'Jewish' means".[342]
The New Testament gives no description of the physical appearance of Jesus before his death—it is generally indifferent to racial appearances and does not refer to the features of the people it mentions.[343][344][345] Jesus probably looked like a typical Jew of his time and according to some scholars was likely to have had a sinewy appearance due to his ascetic and itinerant lifestyle.[346]
Christ myth theory
The Christ myth theory is the hypothesis that Jesus of Nazareth never existed; or if he did, that he had virtually nothing to do with the founding of Christianity and the accounts in the gospels.[q] Stories of Jesus' birth, along with other key events, have so many mythic elements that some scholars have suggested that Jesus himself was a myth.[348] Bruno Bauer (1809–1882) taught that the first Gospel was a work of literature that produced history rather than described it.[349] According to Albert Kalthoff (1850–1906) a social movement produced Jesus when it encountered Jewish messianic expectations.[349] Arthur Drews (1865–1935) saw Jesus as the concrete form of a myth that predated Christianity.[349] Despite arguments put forward by authors who have questioned the existence of a historical Jesus, there remains a strong consensus in historical-critical biblical scholarship that a historical Jesus did live in that area and in that time period.[350][351][352][353][354][355][356]
Perspectives
Apart from his own disciples and followers, the Jews of Jesus' day generally rejected him as the Messiah, as do the great majority of Jews today. Christian theologians, ecumenical councils, reformers and others have written extensively about Jesus over the centuries. Christian sects and schisms have often been defined or characterized by their descriptions of Jesus. Meanwhile, Manichaeans, Gnostics, Muslims, Baha'is, and others have found prominent places for Jesus in their religions.[357][358][359] Jesus has also had detractors, both past and present.
Christian
The Trinity is the belief in Christianity that God is one God in three persons: God the Father, God the Son (Jesus), and God the Holy Spirit.
Jesus is depicted with the Alpha and Omega letters in the catacombs of Rome from the 4th century.
Jesus is the central figure of Christianity.[13] Although Christian views of Jesus vary, it is possible to summarize the key beliefs shared among major denominations, as stated in their catechetical or confessional texts.[360][361][362] Christian views of Jesus are derived from various sources, including the canonical gospels and New Testament letters such as the Pauline epistles and the Johannine writings. These documents outline the key beliefs held by Christians about Jesus, including his divinity, humanity, and earthly life, and that he is the Christ and the Son of God.[363] Despite their many shared beliefs, not all Christian denominations agree on all doctrines, and both major and minor differences on teachings and beliefs have persisted throughout Christianity for centuries.[364]
The New Testament states that the resurrection of Jesus is the foundation of the Christian faith (1 Corinthians 15:12–20).[365] Christians believe that through his sacrificial death and resurrection, humans can be reconciled with God and are thereby offered salvation and the promise of eternal life.[34] Recalling the words of John the Baptist on the day after Jesus' baptism, these doctrines sometimes refer to Jesus as the Lamb of God, who was crucified to fulfill his role as the servant of God.[366][367] Jesus is thus seen as the new and last Adam, whose obedience contrasts with Adam's disobedience.[368] Christians view Jesus as a role model, whose God-focused life believers are encouraged to imitate.[13]
Most Christians believe that Jesus was both human and the Son of God.[14] While there has been theological debate over his nature,[r] some early beliefs viewed Jesus as subordinate to the Father (Subordinationism), and others considered him an aspect of the Father rather than a separate person (Sabellianism), both were condemned as heresies by the Catholic Church.[43][369] The Church resolved the issues in ancient councils, which established the Holy Trinity, with Jesus both fully human and fully God.[43] Trinitarian Christians generally believe that Jesus is the Logos, God's incarnation and God the Son, both fully divine and fully human. However, the doctrine of the Trinity is not universally accepted among Christians.[370][371] With the Protestant Reformation, Christians such as Michael Servetus and the Socinians started questioning the ancient creeds that had established Jesus' two natures.[43] Nontrinitarian Christian groups include The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,[372] Unitarians and Jehovah's Witnesses.[369]
Christians revere not only Jesus himself, but also his name. Devotions to the Holy Name of Jesus go back to the earliest days of Christianity.[373][374] These devotions and feasts exist in both Eastern and Western Christianity.[374]
Jewish
Rabbinic Judaism, which descended from the Pharisees, rejects the idea of Jesus being God,[42] or a mediator to God, or part of a Trinity.[375] It holds that Jesus is not the Messiah, arguing that he neither fulfilled the Messianic prophecies in the Tanakh nor embodied the personal qualifications of the Messiah.[376] Jews argue that Jesus did not fulfill prophesies to build the Third Temple (Ezekiel 37:26–28), gather Jews back to Israel (Isaiah 43:5–6), bring world peace (Isaiah 2:4), and unite humanity under the God of Israel (Zechariah 14:9).[377] Furthermore, according to Jewish tradition, there were no prophets after Malachi,[378] who delivered his prophesies in the 5th century BC.[379]
Judaic criticism of Jesus is long-standing. The Talmud, written and compiled from the 3rd to the 5th century AD,[380] includes stories that since medieval times have been considered to be defamatory accounts of Jesus.[381] In one such story, Yeshu HaNozri ("Jesus the Christian"), a lewd apostate, is executed by the Jewish high court for spreading idolatry and practicing magic.[382] The majority of contemporary scholars consider that this material provides no information on the historical Jesus.[383] The Mishneh Torah, a late 12th-century work of Jewish law written by Moses Maimonides, states that Jesus is a "stumbling block" who makes "the majority of the world to err and serve a god other than the Lord".[384]
Medieval Hebrew literature contains the anecdotal "Episode of Jesus" (known also as Toledot Yeshu), in which Jesus is described as being the son of Joseph, the son of Pandera (see: Episode of Jesus). The account portrays Jesus as an impostor.[385]
Islamic
The name Jesus son of Mary written in Islamic calligraphy followed by Peace be upon him
A major figure in Islam,[38][40] Jesus (commonly transliterated as ʾĪsā) is considered to be a messenger of God (Allah) and the Messiah (al-Masih) who was sent to guide the Children of Israel (Bani Isra'il) with a new scripture, the Gospel (referred to in Islam as Injil).[39][386] Muslims regard the gospels of the New Testament as inauthentic, and believe that Jesus' original message was lost or altered and that Muhammad came later to restore it.[387] Belief in Jesus (and all other messengers of God) is a requirement for being a Muslim.[388] The Quran mentions Jesus by name 25 times—more often than Muhammad[389][390]—and emphasizes that Jesus was a mortal human who, like all other prophets, had been divinely chosen to spread God's message.[391] While the Qur'an affirms the Virgin birth of Jesus, he is considered to be neither the incarnation nor the son of God. Islamic texts emphasize a strict notion of monotheism (tawhid) and forbid the association of partners with God, which would be idolatry.[392] Like all prophets in Islam, Jesus is considered a Muslim.[393]
The Quran describes the annunciation to Mary (Maryam) by an angel that she is to give birth to Jesus while remaining a virgin. It calls the virgin birth a miracle that occurred by the will of God.[394][395] The Quran (21:91 and 66:12) states that God breathed his spirit into Mary while she was chaste.[394][395] Jesus is called the "Spirit of God" because he was born through the action of the Spirit,[394] but that belief does not imply his pre-existence.[396]
To aid in his ministry to the Jewish people, Jesus was given the ability to perform miracles, by permission of God rather than by his own power.[41] Through his ministry, Jesus is seen as a precursor to Muhammad.[391] According to the Quran, Jesus was not crucified but was merely made to appear that way to unbelievers by Allah,[397] who physically raised Jesus into the heavens.[398] To Muslims, it is the ascension rather than the crucifixion that constitutes a major event in the life of Jesus.[399] Most Muslims believe that Jesus will return to earth at the end of time and defeat the Antichrist (ad-Dajjal) by killing him in Lud.[39]
The Ahmadiyya Muslim Community has several distinct teachings about Jesus. Ahmadis believe that he was a mortal man who survived his crucifixion and died a natural death at the age of 120 in Kashmir, India and is buried at Roza Bal.[400]
Bahá'í
Bahá'í teachings consider Jesus to be a manifestation of God, a Bahá'í concept for prophets[401]—intermediaries between God and humanity, serving as messengers and reflecting God's qualities and attributes.[402] The Bahá'í concept emphasizes the simultaneous qualities of humanity and divinity;[402] thus, it is similar to the Christian concept of incarnation.[401] Bahá'í thought accepts Jesus as the Son of God.[403] In Bahá'í thought, Jesus was a perfect incarnation of God's attributes, but Bahá'í teachings reject the idea that "ineffable essence" of the Divinity was contained within a single human body because of their beliefs regarding "omnipresence and transcendence of the essence of God".[401]
Bahá'u'lláh, the founder of the Bahá'í Faith, wrote that since each manifestation of God has the same divine attributes, they can be seen as the spiritual "return" of all previous manifestations of God, and the appearance of each new manifestation of God inaugurates a religion that supersedes the former ones, a concept known as progressive revelation.[402] Bahá'ís believe that God's plan unfolds gradually through this process as mankind matures, and that some of the manifestations arrive in specific fulfillment of the missions of previous ones. Thus, Bahá'ís believe that Bahá'u'lláh is the promised return of Christ.[404] Bahá'í teachings confirm many, but not all, aspects of Jesus as portrayed in the gospels. Bahá'ís believe in the virgin birth and in the Crucifixion,[405][406] but see the Resurrection and the miracles of Jesus as symbolic.[403][406]
Other
In Christian Gnosticism (now a largely extinct religious movement),[407] Jesus was sent from the divine realm and provided the secret knowledge (gnosis) necessary for salvation. Most Gnostics believed that Jesus was a human who became possessed by the spirit of "the Christ" at his baptism. This spirit left Jesus' body during the crucifixion, but was rejoined to him when he was raised from the dead. Some Gnostics, however, were docetics, believed that Jesus did not have a physical body, but only appeared to possess one.[408] Manichaeism, a Gnostic sect, accepted Jesus as a prophet, in addition to revering Gautama Buddha and Zoroaster.[409][410]
Some Hindus consider Jesus to be an avatar or a sadhu.[411] Paramahansa Yogananda, an Indian guru, taught that Jesus was the reincarnation of Elisha and a student of John the Baptist, the reincarnation of Elijah.[412] Some Buddhists, including Tenzin Gyatso, the 14th Dalai Lama, regard Jesus as a bodhisattva who dedicated his life to the welfare of people.[413] The New Age movement entertains a wide variety of views on Jesus.[414] Theosophists, from whom many New Age teachings originated,[415] refer to Jesus as the Master Jesus and believe that Christ, after various incarnations, occupied the body of Jesus.[416] Scientologists recognize Jesus (along with other religious figures such as Zoroaster, Muhammad, and Buddha) as part of their "religious heritage".[414][417] Atheists reject Jesus' divinity, but have differing views on Jesus' moral teachings. For example, Richard Dawkins has called him "a great moral teacher",[418][419] while Christopher Hitchens deemed his teachings on forgiveness "positively immoral".[420]
Artistic depictions
An ancient wall painting depicting Jesus
Jesus healing a paralytic in one of the first known images of Jesus from Dura Europos in the 2nd century[421]
Some of the earliest depictions of Jesus at the Dura-Europos church are firmly dated to before 256.[422] Thereafter, despite the lack of biblical references or historical records, a wide range of depictions of Jesus appeared during the last two millennia, often influenced by cultural settings, political circumstances and theological contexts.[330][331][344] As in other Early Christian art, the earliest depictions date to the late 2nd or early 3rd century, and surviving images are found especially in the Catacombs of Rome.[423]
The depiction of Christ in pictorial form was highly controversial in the early church.[424][s][425] From the 5th century onward, flat painted icons became popular in the Eastern Church.[426] The Byzantine Iconoclasm acted as a barrier to developments in the East, but by the ninth century, art was permitted again.[330] The Protestant Reformation brought renewed resistance to imagery, but total prohibition was atypical, and Protestant objections to images have tended to reduce since the 16th century. Although large images are generally avoided, few Protestants now object to book illustrations depicting Jesus.[427][428] The use of depictions of Jesus is advocated by the leaders of denominations such as Anglicans and Catholics[429][430][431] and is a key element of the Eastern Orthodox tradition.[432][433]
The Transfiguration was a major theme in Eastern Christian art, and every Eastern Orthodox monk who had trained in icon painting had to prove his craft by painting an icon depicting it.[434] Icons receive the external marks of veneration, such as kisses and prostration, and they are thought to be powerful channels of divine grace.[426] The Renaissance brought forth a number of artists who focused on depictions of Jesus; Fra Angelico and others followed Giotto in the systematic development of uncluttered images.[330]
Before the Protestant Reformation, the crucifix was common in Western Christianity. It is a model of the cross with Jesus crucified on it. The crucifix became the central ornament of the altar in the 13th century, a use that has been nearly universal in Roman Catholic churches since then.[435]
Jesus appears as an infant in a manger (feed trough) in Christmas creches, which depict the Nativity scene.[436] He is typically joined by Mary, Joseph, animals, shepherds, angels, and the Magi.[436] Francis of Assisi (1181/82–1226) is credited with popularizing the creche, although he probably did not initiate it.[436] The creche reached its height of popularity in the 17th and 18th centuries in southern Europe.[436]
Associated relics
The total destruction that ensued with the siege of Jerusalem by the Romans in AD 70 made the survival of items from 1st-century Judea very rare and almost no direct records survive about the history of Judaism from the last part of the 1st century through the 2nd century.[437][438][t] Margaret M. Mitchell writes that although Eusebius reports (Ecclesiastical History III 5.3) that the early Christians left Jerusalem for Pella just before Jerusalem was subjected to the final lock down, we must accept that no first hand Christian items from the early Jerusalem Church have reached us.[440] Joe Nickell writes, "as investigation after investigation has shown, not a single, reliably authenticated relic of Jesus exists."[441][u]
However, throughout the history of Christianity a number of relics attributed to Jesus have been claimed, although doubt has been cast on them. The 16th-century Catholic theologian Erasmus wrote sarcastically about the proliferation of relics and the number of buildings that could have been constructed from the wood claimed to be from the cross used in the Crucifixion.[444] Similarly, while experts debate whether Jesus was crucified with three nails or with four, at least thirty holy nails continue to be venerated as relics across Europe.[445]
Some relics, such as purported remnants of the Crown of Thorns, receive only a modest number of pilgrims, while the Shroud of Turin (which is associated with an approved Catholic devotion to the Holy Face of Jesus), has received millions,[446] including popes John Paul II and Benedict XVI.[447][448]
See also
Jesuism
List of founders of religious traditions
List of people who have been considered deities
List of books about Jesus
List of people claimed to be Jesus
Comparison of the founders of religious traditions
Notes
Meier writes that Jesus' birth year is c. 7 or 6 BC.[1] Rahner states that the consensus among scholars is c. 4 BC.[2] Sanders also favors c. 4 BC and refers to the general consensus.[3] Finegan uses the study of early Christian traditions to support c. 3 or 2 BC.[4]
Most scholars estimate AD 30 or 33 as the year of Jesus' crucifixion.[6]
James Dunn writes that the baptism and crucifixion of Jesus "command almost universal assent" and "rank so high on the 'almost impossible to doubt or deny' scale of historical facts" that they are often the starting points for the study of the historical Jesus.[7] Bart Ehrman states that the crucifixion of Jesus on the orders of Pontius Pilate is the most certain element about him.[8] John Dominic Crossan and Richard G. Watts state that the crucifixion of Jesus is as certain as any historical fact can be.[9] Paul R. Eddy and Gregory A. Boyd say that non-Christian confirmation of the crucifixion of Jesus is now "firmly established".[10]
Traditionally, Christians believe that Mary conceived her son miraculously by the agency of the Holy Spirit. Muslims believe that she conceived her son miraculously by the command of God. Joseph was from these perspectives the acting adoptive father.
Greek: Ἰησοῦς, translit. Iesous; Hebrew: ישוע‎, translit. Yēšū́aʿ
The New Testament records a variety of names and titles accorded to Jesus.
In a 2011 review of the state of modern scholarship, Bart Ehrman wrote, "He certainly existed, as virtually every competent scholar of antiquity, Christian or non-Christian, agrees".[15] Richard A. Burridge states: "There are those who argue that Jesus is a figment of the Church's imagination, that there never was a Jesus at all. I have to say that I do not know any respectable critical scholar who says that any more".[16] Robert M. Price does not believe that Jesus existed, but agrees that this perspective runs against the views of the majority of scholars.[17] James D. G. Dunn calls the theories of Jesus' non-existence "a thoroughly dead thesis".[18] Michael Grant (a classicist) wrote in 1977, "In recent years, 'no serious scholar has ventured to postulate the non historicity of Jesus' or at any rate very few, and they have not succeeded in disposing of the much stronger, indeed very abundant, evidence to the contrary".[19] Robert E. Van Voorst states that biblical scholars and classical historians regard theories of non-existence of Jesus as effectively refuted.[20]
Ehrman writes: "The notion that the Gospel accounts are not completely accurate but still important for the religious truths they try to convey is widely shared in the scholarly world, even though it's not so widely known or believed outside of it."[22]
Sanders writes: "The earliest Christians did not write a narrative of Jesus' life, but rather made use of, and thus preserved, individual units—short passages about his words and deeds. These units were later moved and arranged by authors and editors. ... Some material has been revised and some created by early Christians."[23]
The BBC describes this as follows: "Year 1: CE – What is nowadays called the 'Current Era' traditionally begins with the birth of a Jewish teacher called Jesus. His followers came to believe he was the promised Messiah and later split away from Judaism to found Christianity."[31]
This article uses quotes from the New Revised Standard Version of the Bible.
Powell writes: "[Paul] does cite words or instructions of Jesus in a few places (1 Cor. 7:10–11; 9:14; 11:23–25; 2 Cor. 12:9; cf. Acts 20:35), but for the most part he displays little interest in the details of Jesus' earthly life and ministry."[70]
Amy-Jill Levine writes: "There is a consensus of sorts on a basic outline of Jesus' life. Most scholars agree that Jesus was baptized by John, debated with fellow Jews on how best to live according to God's will, engaged in healings and exorcisms, taught in parables, gathered male and female followers in Galilee, went to Jerusalem, and was crucified by Roman soldiers during the governorship of Pontius Pilate"[238]
Tuckett writes: "All this does at least render highly implausible any far-fetched theories that even Jesus' very existence was a Christian invention. The fact that Jesus existed, that he was crucified under Pontius Pilate (for whatever reason) and that he had a band of followers who continued to support his cause, seems to be part of the bedrock of historical tradition. If nothing else, the non-Christian evidence can provide us with certainty on that score."[255]
For example, John P. Meier states that Jesus' birth year is c. 7/6 BC,[1] while Finegan favors c. 3/2 BC.[4]
In the New Testament, Jesus is described as Jewish / Judean (Ioudaios as written in Koine Greek) on three occasions: by the Magi in Matthew 2, who referred to Jesus as "King of the Jews" (basileus ton ioudaion); by both the Samaritan woman at the well and by Jesus himself in John 4; and (in all four gospels) during the Passion, by the Romans, who also used the phrase "King of the Jews".[338]
Ehrman writes: ""In simpler terms, the historical Jesus did not exist. Or if he did, he had virtually nothing to do with the founding of Christianity." further quoting as authoritative the fuller definition provided by Earl Doherty in Jesus: Neither God Nor Man. Age of Reason, 2009, pp. vii–viii: it is "the theory that no historical Jesus worthy of the name existed, that Christianity began with a belief in a spiritual, mythical figure, that the Gospels are essentially allegory and fiction, and that no single identifiable person lay at the root of the Galilean preaching tradition."[347]
Following the Apostolic Age, there was fierce and often politicized debate in the early church on many interrelated issues. Christology was a major focus of these debates, and was addressed at every one of the first seven ecumenical councils.
Philip Schaff commenting on Irenaeus, wrote, 'This censure of images as a Gnostic peculiarity, and as a heathenish corruption, should be noted'. Footnote 300 on Contr. Her. .I.XXV.6. ANF
Flavius Josephus writing (about 5 years later, c. AD 75) in The Jewish War (Book VII 1.1) stated that Jerusalem had been flattened to the point that "there was left nothing to make those that came thither believe it had ever been inhabited."[439] And once what was left of the ruins of Jerusalem had been turned into the Roman settlement of Aelia Capitolina, no Jews were allowed to set foot in it.[438]
Polarized conclusions regarding the Shroud of Turin remain.[442] According to former Nature editor Philip Ball, "it's fair to say that, despite the seemingly definitive tests in 1988, the status of the Shroud of Turin is murkier than ever. Not least, the nature of the image and how it was fixed on the cloth remain deeply puzzling".[443]
References
Citations
Meier, John P. (1991). A Marginal Jew: The roots of the problem and the person. Yale University Press. p. 407. ISBN 978-0-300-14018-7.
Rahner 2004, p. 732.
Sanders 1993, pp. 10–11.
Finegan, Jack (1998). Handbook of Biblical Chronology, rev. ed. Hendrickson Publishers. p. 319. ISBN 978-1-56563-143-4.
Brown, Raymond E. (1977). The birth of the Messiah: a commentary on the infancy narratives in Matthew and Luke. Doubleday. p. 513. ISBN 978-0-385-05907-7.
Humphreys, Colin J.; Waddington, W. G. (1992). "The Jewish Calendar, a Lunar Eclipse and the Date of Christ's Crucifixion" (PDF). Tyndale Bulletin. 43 (2): 340.
Dunn 2003, p. 339.
Ehrman 1999, p. 101.
Crossan & Watts 1999, p. 96.
Eddy & Boyd 2007, p. 173.
Theissen & Merz 1998.
Vermes, Geza (1981). Jesus the Jew: A Historian's Reading of the Gospels. Philadelphia: First Fortress. pp. 20, 26, 27, 29. ISBN 0-8006-1443-7.
McGrath 2006, pp. 4–6.
Ehrman, Bart D. (2014). How Jesus became God: The Exaltation of a Jewish Preacher from Galilee. HarperOne. ISBN 978-0061778186.
Ehrman, Bart (2011). Forged: writing in the name of God – Why the Bible's Authors Are Not Who We Think They Are. HarperCollins. p. 285. ISBN 978-0-06-207863-6.
Burridge, Richard A.; Gould, Graham (2004). Jesus Now and Then. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 34. ISBN 978-0-8028-0977-3.
Price, Robert M. (2009). "Jesus at the Vanishing Point". In Beilby, James K.; Eddy, Paul R. The Historical Jesus: Five Views. InterVarsity. pp. 55, 61. ISBN 978-0-8308-7853-6.
Sykes, Stephen W. (2007). "Paul's understanding of the death of Jesus". Sacrifice and Redemption. Cambridge University Press. pp. 35–36. ISBN 978-0-521-04460-8.
Grant, Michael (1977). Jesus: An Historian's Review of the Gospels. Scribner's. p. 200. ISBN 978-0-684-14889-2.
Van Voorst 2000, p. 16.
Powell 1998, pp. 168–73.
Bart D. Ehrman, MDiv, PhD. Historical Jesus. 'Prophet of the New Millennium.' Course handbook, p. 10 (Lecture Three. V. B.) The Teaching Company, 2000, Lecture 24
Sanders 1993, p. 57.
Dunn, James D. G. (2013). The Oral Gospel Tradition. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. pp. 290–91.
James Orr, ed. (1939). "International Standard Bible Encyclopedia Online". Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co.
Levine 2006, p. 4.
Charlesworth, James H. (2008). The Historical Jesus: An Essential Guide. p. 113. ISBN 9781426724756.
Sanders 1993, p. 11.
Sanders 1993, pp. 11, 14.
"anno Domini". Merriam Webster Online Dictionary. Merriam-Webster. 2003. Retrieved November 3, 2016. Etymology: Medieval Latin, in the year of our Lord
BBC Team (February 8, 2005). "History of Judaism 63 BCE–1086 CE". BBC Religion & Ethics. British Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved April 20, 2016.
Grudem 1994, pp. 568–603.
Wilhelm, Joseph (1911). "The Nicene Creed". The Catholic Encyclopedia. 11. Robert Appleton Company.
Metzger, Bruce M.; Coogan, Michael D. (1993). Oxford Companion to the Bible. Oxford University Press. p. 649. ISBN 978-0-19-974391-9.
Tabor, James. "What the Bible Says About Death, Afterlife, and the Future". UNCC.
Hoekema, Anthony A. (1994). The Bible and the Future. Eerdmans Publishing. pp. 88–89. ISBN 9780853646242.
Garrett, James L. (2014). Systematic Theology, Volume 2, Second Edition: Biblical, Historical, and Evangelical. Wipf and Stock Publishers. p. 766. ISBN 9781625648525.
"Quran 3:46–158". Archived from the original on May 1, 2015.
Glassé, Cyril (2008). Concise Encyclopedia of Islam. Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 270–71. ISBN 978-0-7425-6296-7.
Siddiqui, Mona (2013). Christians, Muslims, and Jesus. Yale University Press. ISBN 0300169701.
Morgan, Diane (2010). Essential Islam: A Comprehensive Guide to Belief and Practice. ABC-CLIO. pp. 45–46. ISBN 978-0-313-36025-1.
Jacobs, Joseph; Kohler, Kaufmann; Gottheil, Richard; Krauss, Samuel. "Jesus of Nazareth". Jewish Encyclopedia.
Sanders, Ed P.; Pelikan, Jaroslav J. "Jesus Christ". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved June 10, 2015.
Mark 10:47
Mark 6:3
Matthew 13:55
Luke 4:22
John 1:45
Wikisource-logo.svg Maas, Anthony J. (1913). "Origin of the Name of Jesus Christ". In Herbermann, Charles. Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.
Wycliffe Bible Dictionary. entry Hebrew Language: Hendrickson Publishers. 1975.
Ehrman, Bart D. (2012). Did Jesus Exist?: The Historical Argument for Jesus of Nazareth. HarperOne. p. 29. ISBN 978-0-06-208994-6.
"Joshua". Merriam-Webster. Retrieved August 4, 2013.
Hare, Douglas (2009). Matthew. Westminster John Knox Press. p. 11. ISBN 978-0-664-23433-1.
Rogers, Cleon (1999). Topical Josephus. Zondervan. p. 12. ISBN 9780310230175.
Eddy & Boyd 2007, p. 129.
France 2007, p. 53.
Doninger 1999, p. 212.
Pannenberg 1968, pp. 30–31.
Bultmann, Rudolf K. (2007). Theology of the New Testament. Baylor University Press. p. 80. ISBN 1-932792-93-7.
Heil, John P. (2010). Philippians: Let Us Rejoice in Being Conformed to Christ. Society of Biblical Lit. p. 66. ISBN 978-1-58983-482-8.
Gwynn, Murl E. (2011). Conflict: Christianity's Love Vs. Islam's Submission. iUniverse. p. 92. ISBN 978-1-4620-3484-0.
Vine 1940, pp. 274–75.
Mills & Bullard 1998, p. 142.
Blomberg 2009, pp. 441–42.
Fahlbusch, Erwin (2005). The Encyclopedia of Christianity. 4. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. pp. 53–56. ISBN 978-0-8028-2416-5.
Evans 2003, pp. 465–77.
Bruce, Frederick F. (1988). The Book of the Acts. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 362. ISBN 978-0-8028-2505-6.
Rausch 2003, p. 77.
Evans 2003, pp. 521–30.
Powell, Mark A. (2009). Introducing the New Testament. Baker Academic. p. 248.
Brown 1997, pp. 835–40.
Evans, C.A. (2008). Exploring the Origins of the Bible. Baker Academic. p. 154.
Keener, Craig S. (2009). The Historical Jesus of the Gospels. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 56.
Funk, Robert W.; Hoover, Roy W. (1993). The Five Gospels. Harper. p. 3.
May, Herbert G. and Bruce M. Metzger. The New Oxford Annotated Bible with the Apocrypha. 1977. "Mark" p. 1213–39
Cross & Livingstone 2005, John, St..
Burridge, R. A. (2006). Gospels. In J. W. Rogerson & Judith M. Lieu (Eds) The Oxford Handbook of Biblical Studies. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 433
Talbert, C. H. (1977). What is a Gospel? The Genre of the Canonical Gospels. Philadelphia: Fortress Press.
Wills, L. M. (1997). The Quest of the Historical Gospel: Mark, John and the Origins of the Gospel Genre. London: Routledge. p. 10.
Burridge, R. A. (2004). What are the Gospels? A Comparison with Graeco-Roman Biography. rev. updated edn. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Eerdmans.
e.g. Vines, M. E. (2002). The Problem of the Markan Genre: The Gospel of Mark and the Jewish Novel. Atlanta: Society of Biblical Literature. pp. 161–62.
Graham N. Stanton (8 July 2004). Jesus and Gospel. Cambridge University Press. p. 192. ISBN 978-0-521-00802-0.
J. W. Rogerson; Judith M. Lieu (16 March 2006). The Oxford Handbook of Biblical Studies. Oxford University Press. p. 437. ISBN 978-0-19-925425-5.
Sanders 1993, p. 3.
Grudem 1994, pp. 90–91.
Köstenberger, Kellum & Quarles 2009, pp. 117–25.
Ehrman 1999, pp. 22–23.
Sanders 1993, p. 71.
Theissen & Merz 1998, pp. 17–62.
Roberts, Mark D. (2007). Can We Trust the Gospels?: Investigating the Reliability of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. Crossway. p. 58. ISBN 978-1-4335-1978-9.
Licona 2010, pp. 210–21.
Haffner, Paul (2008). New Testament Theology. p. 135. ISBN 978-88-902268-0-9.
Scroggie, W. Graham (1995). A Guide to the Gospels. Kregel Publications. p. 128. ISBN 978-0-8254-9571-7.
"synoptic". Oxford English Dictionary (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. September 2005. (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)
Moloney, Francis J.; Harrington, Daniel J. (1998). The Gospel of John. Liturgical Press. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-8146-5806-2.
Ladd, George E. (1993). A Theology of the New Testament. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 251. ISBN 978-0-8028-0680-2.
Witherington 1997, p. 113.
Metzger, Paul L. (2010). The Gospel of John: When Love Comes to Town. InterVarsity Press. p. 281.
Thompson, Frank Charles. The Thompson Chain-Reference Bible. Kirk bride Bible Co & Zondervan Bible Publishers. 1983. pp. 1563–64.
May, Herbert G. and Bruce M. Metzger. The New Oxford Annotated Bible with the Apocrypha. 1977. "Matthew" pp. 1171–1212.
May, Herbert G. and Bruce M. Metzger. The New Oxford Annotated Bible with the Apocrypha. 1977. "Luke" pp. 1240–85.
May, Herbert G. and Bruce M. Metzger. The New Oxford Annotated Bible with the Apocrypha. 1977. "John" pp. 1286–318.
Harris 1985, pp. 302–10.
Rahner 2004, pp. 730–31.
O'Collins, Gerald (2009). Christology: A Biblical, Historical, and Systematic Study of Jesus. OUP Oxford. pp. 1–3. ISBN 978-0-19-955787-5.
Wiarda, Timothy (2010). Interpreting Gospel Narratives: Scenes, People, and Theology. B&H Publishing Group. pp. 75–78. ISBN 978-0-8054-4843-6.
Turner, David L. (2008). Matthew. Baker Academic. p. 613. ISBN 978-0-8010-2684-3.
Sanders 1993, pp. 80–91.
Brown 1978, p. 163.
Mills & Bullard 1998, p. 556.
Marsh, Clive; Moyise, Steve (2006). Jesus and the Gospels. Clark International. p. 37. ISBN 978-0-567-04073-2.
Morris 1992, p. 26.
Jeffrey, David L. (1992). A Dictionary of biblical tradition in English literature. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. pp. 538–40. ISBN 978-0-85244-224-1.
Cox & Easley 2007, pp. 30–37.
Brownrigg, Ronald (2002). Who's Who in the New Testament. Taylor & Francis. pp. 96–100. ISBN 978-0-415-26036-7.
Talbert, Charles H. (2010). Matthew. Baker Academic. pp. 29–30. ISBN 978-0-8010-3192-2.
Harris 1985, pp. 272–85.
Schnackenburg, Rudolf (2002). The Gospel of Matthew. Wm.B. Eerdmans Publishing. pp. 9–11. ISBN 978-0-8028-4438-5.
Perrotta, Louise B. (2000). Saint Joseph: His Life and His Role in the Church Today. Our Sunday Visitor Publishing. pp. 21, 110–12. ISBN 978-0-87973-573-9.
Aslan, Reza (2013). Zealot: The Life and Times of Jesus of Nazareth. Random House. p. 756. ISBN 9781400069224.
Harris 1985, pp. 270–72.
Liddell, Henry G.; Scott, Robert (1889). An Intermediate Greek–English Lexicon: The Seventh Edition of Liddell and Scott's Greek–English Lexicon. Clarendon Press. p. 797.
Dickson 2008, pp. 68–69.
Evans, Craig A. (2001). "Context, family and formation". In Bockmuehl, Markus N. A. Cambridge companion to Jesus. Cambridge University Press. pp. 14, 21. ISBN 978-0-521-79678-1.
Blomberg 2009, pp. 224–29.
Köstenberger, Kellum & Quarles 2009, pp. 141–43.
McGrath 2006, pp. 16–22.
Dunn, James D. G.; Rogerson, John W. (2003). Eerdmans commentary on the Bible. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 1010. ISBN 978-0-8028-3711-0.
Zanzig, Thomas (2000). Jesus of history, Christ of faith. Saint Mary's Press. p. 118. ISBN 978-0-88489-530-5.
Lee 2004, pp. 21–30.
Harding, Mark; Nobbs, Alanna (2010). The Content and the Setting of the Gospel Tradition. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. pp. 281–82. ISBN 978-0-8028-3318-1.
Sheen, Fulton J. (2008). Life of Christ. Random House. p. 65. ISBN 978-0-385-52699-9.
Cross & Livingstone 2005, Jesus Christ.
Boring & Craddock 2004, p. 292.
Harris 1985, pp. 285–96.
Redford 2007, pp. 117–30.
Vaught, Carl G. (2001). The Sermon on the mount: a theological investigation. Baylor University Press. pp. xi–xiv. ISBN 978-0-918954-76-3.
Redford 2007, pp. 143–60.
Nash, Henry S. (1909). "Transfiguration, The". In Jackson, Samuel M. The New Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Thought: Son of Man-Tremellius V11. Funk & Wagnalls Company. p. 493. ISBN 978-1-4286-3189-2.
Barton, Stephen C. The Cambridge Companion to the Gospels. Cambridge University Press. pp. 132–33. ISBN 978-0-521-80766-1.
Cox & Easley 2007, p. 137.
Redford 2007, pp. 211–29.
Cox & Easley 2007, pp. 155–70.
Redford 2007, pp. 257–74.
Brown 1988, pp. 25–27.
Boring & Craddock 2004, pp. 292–93.
Patella, Michael F. (2009). "The Gospel According to Luke". In Durken, Daniel. New Collegeville Bible Commentary: New Testament. Liturgical Press. p. 255. ISBN 978-0-8146-3260-4.
Theissen & Merz 1998, pp. 316–46.
Stassen, Glen H.; Gushee, David P. (2003). Kingdom Ethics: Following Jesus in Contemporary Context. InterVarsity Press. pp. 102–03, 138–40, 197–98, 295–98. ISBN 978-0-8308-2668-1.
Osborn, Eric F. (1993). The emergence of Christian theology. Cambridge University Press. p. 98. ISBN 978-0-521-43078-4.
Köstenberger, Andreas J. (1998). The missions of Jesus and the disciples according to the Fourth Gospel. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. pp. 108–09. ISBN 978-0-8028-4255-8.
Pentecost, J. Dwight (1998). The parables of Jesus: lessons in life from the Master Teacher. Kregel Publications. p. 10. ISBN 978-0-8254-9715-5.
Howick, E. Keith (2003). The Sermons of Jesus the Messiah. WindRiver Publishing. pp. 7–9. ISBN 978-1-886249-02-8.
Lisco, Friedrich G. (1850). The Parables of Jesus. Daniels and Smith Publishers. pp. 9–11.
Oxenden, Ashton (1864). The parables of our Lord?. William Macintosh Publishers. p. 6.
Blomberg, Craig L. (2012). Interpreting the Parables. InterVarsity Press. p. 448. ISBN 978-0-8308-3967-4.
Boucher, Madeleine I. "The Parables". BBC. Retrieved June 3, 2013.
Green, McKnight & Marshall 1992, p. 299.
Twelftree 1999, p. 350.
Theissen & Merz 1998, p. 298.
Green, McKnight & Marshall 1992, p. 300.
Sanders, Ed P.; Pelikan, Jaroslav J. "Jesus Christ". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved June 10, 2015.
Hindson, Edward E.; Mitchell, Daniel R. (2010). Zondervan King James Version Commentary: New Testament. Zondervan. p. 100. ISBN 978-0-310-25150-7.
Achtemeier, Paul J.; Green, Joel B.; Thompson, Marianne M. (2001). Introducing the New Testament: Its Literature and Theology. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 198. ISBN 978-0-8028-3717-2.
Ehrman, Bart D. (2009). Jesus, Interrupted: Revealing the Hidden Contradictions in the Bible (And Why We Don't Know About Them). HarperCollins. p. 84. ISBN 978-0-06-186328-8.
Twelftree 1999, p. 236.
van der Loos, Hendrik (1965). The Miracles Of Jesus. Brill. p. 197.
Pentecost, J. Dwight (1981). The words and works of Jesus Christ. Zondervan. p. 212. ISBN 978-0-310-30940-6.
Twelftree 1999, p. 95.
Donahue & Harrington 2002, p. 182.
Lockyer, Herbert (1988). All the Miracles of the Bible. Zondervan. p. 235. ISBN 978-0-310-28101-6.
Kingsbury, Jack D. (1983). The Christology of Mark's Gospel. Fortress Press. pp. 91–95. ISBN 978-1-4514-1007-5.
Cross & Livingstone 2005, John, Gospel of.
Karris, Robert J. (1992). The Collegeville Bible Commentary: New Testament. Liturgical Press. pp. 885–86. ISBN 978-0-8146-2211-7.
Kingsbury, Jack D.; Powell, Mark A.; Bauer, David R. (1999). Who do you say that I am? Essays on Christology. Westminster John Knox Press. p. xvi. ISBN 978-0-664-25752-1.
Donahue & Harrington 2002, p. 336.
Yieh, John Y. H. (2004). One teacher: Jesus' teaching role in Matthew's gospel. Walter de Gruyter. pp. 240–41. ISBN 978-3-11-018151-7.
Pannenberg 1968, pp. 53–54.
Lee 2004, pp. 72–76.
Boring & Craddock 2004, pp. 256–58.
Majerník, Ponessa & Manhardt 2005, pp. 133–34.
Evans 2003, pp. 381–95.
Lockyer, Herbert (1988). All the Apostles of the Bible. Zondervan. pp. 106–11. ISBN 978-0-310-28011-8.
Hayes, Doremus A. (2009). The Synoptic Gospels and the Book of Acts. HardPress. p. 88. ISBN 978-1-313-53490-1.
Funk & Hoover 1993, pp. 401–70.
Cox & Easley 2007, pp. 180–91.
Cox & Easley 2007, p. 182.
Cross & Livingstone 2005, Eucharist.
Wikisource-logo.svg Pohle, Joseph (1913). "The Blessed Eucharist as a Sacrament". In Herbermann, Charles. Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.
Freedman 2000, p. 792.
Perkins, Pheme (2000). Peter: apostle for the whole church. Fortress Press. p. 85. ISBN 978-1-4514-1598-8.
Lange, Johann P. (1865). The Gospel according to Matthew, Volume 1. Charles Scribner Co. p. 499.
Walvoord & Zuck 1983, pp. 83–85.
O'Day, Gail R.; Hylen, Susan (2006). John. Westminster John Knox Press. pp. 142–68. ISBN 978-0-664-25260-1.
Ridderbos, Herman (1997). The Gospel according to John. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. pp. 546–76. ISBN 978-0-8028-0453-2.
Cross & Livingstone 2005, Jesus.
Michaels, J. Ramsey (211). John (Understanding the Bible Commentary Series). Baker Books. p. 187. ISBN 9781441236593.
Brown 1997, p. 146.
Bromiley, Geoffrey W. (1988). International Standard Bible Encyclopedia: E–J. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. pp. 1050–52. ISBN 978-0-8028-3782-0.
Evans 2003, pp. 487–500.
Blomberg 2009, pp. 396–400.
Holman Concise Bible Dictionary. B&H Publishing Group. 2011. pp. 608–09. ISBN 978-0-8054-9548-5.
Evans 2003, p. 495.
Blomberg 2009, pp. 396–98.
O'Toole, Robert F. (2004). Luke's presentation of Jesus: a christology. Editrice Pontificio Istituto Biblico. p. 166. ISBN 978-88-7653-625-0.
Binz, Stephen J. (2004). The Names of Jesus. Twenty-Third Publications. pp. 81–82. ISBN 978-1-58595-315-8.
Ironside, H. A. (2006). John. Kregel Academic. p. 454. ISBN 978-0-8254-9619-6.
Niswonger 1992, p. 172.
Majerník, Ponessa & Manhardt 2005, p. 181.
Carter 2003, pp. 120–21.
Evans, Craig A. (2012). Matthew (New Cambridge Bible Commentary). Cambridge University Press. p. 453. ISBN 978-0521011068.
Blomberg 2009, pp. 400–01.
Brown 1988, p. 93.
Senior, Donald (1985). The Passion of Jesus in the Gospel of Matthew. Liturgical Press. p. 124. ISBN 978-0-8146-5460-6.
Blomberg 2009, p. 402.
Evans 2003, pp. 509–20.
Köstenberger, Kellum & Quarles 2009, pp. 211–14.
Doninger 1999, p. 271.
Ehrman, Bart D. (2009). Jesus, Interrupted: Revealing the Hidden Contradictions in the Bible (And Why We Don't Know About Them). HarperCollins. p. 82. ISBN 978-0-06-186328-8.
Köstenberger, Kellum & Quarles 2009, pp. 213–14.
Morris 1992, p. 727.
Harris 1985, pp. 308–09.
Harris 1985, pp. 297–301.
Cox & Easley 2007, pp. 216–26.
Frederick F., Bruce (1990). The Acts of the Apostles. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 210. ISBN 978-0-8028-0966-7.
Johnson, Luke T.; Harrington, Daniel J. (1992). The Acts of the Apostles. Liturgical Press. pp. 164–67. ISBN 978-0-8146-5807-9.
Wikisource-logo.svg Van den Biesen, Christian (1913). "Apocalypse". In Herbermann, Charles. Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.
Catholic Encyclopedia: Proselyte: "The English term "proselyte" occurs only in the New Testament where it signifies a convert to the Jewish religion (Matthew 23:15; Acts 2:11; 6:5; etc.), though the same Greek word is commonly used in the Septuagint to designate a foreigner living in Palestine. Thus the term seems to have passed from an original local and chiefly political sense, in which it was used as early as 300 BC, to a technical and religious meaning in the Judaism of the New Testament epoch."
Ehrman 2012, pp. 87–90.
Jaeger, Werner (1961). Early Christianity and Greek Paideia. Harvard University Press. pp. 6, 108–09. ISBN 9780674220522. Retrieved 26 February 2015.
Galatians 2:9, Acts 1:13; See Historical reliability of the Acts of the Apostles for details
Cross, F.L., ed. (2005). "Paul". The Oxford dictionary of the Christian Church (3rd rev. ed. ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780192802903.
Cohen, Shaye J.D. (1988). From the Maccabees to the Mishnah ISBN 0-664-25017-3 pp. 224–225
Fee, Gordon; Stuart, Douglas (2014). How to Read the Bible for All Its Worth: Fourth Edition. Zondervan. ISBN 978-0-310-51783-2.
Bart D. Ehrman (1997). The New Testament: A Historical Introduction to the Early Christian Writings. Oxford University Press. p. 8. ISBN 978-0-19-508481-8. The New Testament contains twenty-seven books, written in Greek, by fifteen or sixteen different authors, who were addressing other Christian individuals or communities between the years 50 and 120 C.E. (see box 1.4). As we will see, it is difficult to know whether any of these books was written by Jesus' own disciples.
Levine 2006, p. 5.
Powell 1998, pp. 19–23.
Amy-Jill Levine in The Historical Jesus in Context edited by Amy-Jill Levine et al. Princeton University Press ISBN 978-0-691-00992-6 p. 4
Theissen, Gerd; Winter, Dagmar (2002). The Quest for the Plausible Jesus: The Question of Criteria. Louisville, Kentucky: Westminster John Knox Press. p. 5. ISBN 0664225373.
Jesus Research: An International Perspective (Princeton-Prague Symposia Series on the Historical Jesus) by James H. Charlesworth and Petr Pokorny (September 15, 2009) ISBN 0802863531 pp. 1–2
Keener, Craig S. (2012). The Historical Jesus of the Gospels. William B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 163. ISBN 978-0-8028-6292-1.
Chilton & Evans 1998, p. 27.
Evans 2012, pp. 4–5.
Borg, Marcus J. (1994). Jesus in Contemporary Scholarship. Continuum. pp. 4–6. ISBN 978-1-56338-094-5.
Theissen & Winter 2002, pp. 142–43.
Anderson, Paul N.; Just, Felix; Thatcher, Tom (2007). John, Jesus, and History, Volume 1: Critical Appraisals of Critical Views. Society of Biblical Lit. p. 131. ISBN 978-1-58983-293-0.
Meier 2006, p. 124.
Barr, James (1989). "Chapter 3 - Hebrew, Aramaic and Greek in the Hellenistic age". In Davies, W.D.; Finkelstein, Louis. The Cambridge history of Judaism. Volume 2: The Hellenistic Age (1. publ. ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 79–114. ISBN 9781139055123.
Blomberg 2009, pp. 431–36.
Harris 1985, p. 263.
Rausch 2003, pp. 36–37.
Anderson, Paul N.; Just, Felix; Thatcher, Tom (2007). John, Jesus, and History, Volume 2. Society of Biblical Lit. p. 291. ISBN 978-1-58983-293-0.
Anderson, Paul N.; Just, Felix; Thatcher, Tom (2007). John, Jesus, and History, Volume 2. Society of Biblical Lit. p. 292. ISBN 978-1-58983-293-0.
Funk & Hoover 1993, pp. 471–532.
Tuckett, Christopher (2001). "Sources and methods". In Bockmuehl, Markus N. A. Cambridge Companion to Jesus. Cambridge University Press. pp. 123–24. ISBN 978-0-521-79678-1.
Van Voorst 2000, pp. 39–53.
Van Voorst 2000, p. 83.
Maier, Paul L. (1995). Josephus, the essential works: a condensation of Jewish antiquities and The Jewish war. p. 285. ISBN 978-0-8254-3260-6.
Evans, Craig A. (2001). Jesus and His Contemporaries: Comparative Studies. Brill. p. 42. ISBN 978-0-391-04118-9.
Reed 2002, p. 18.
Gowler, David B. (2007). What are they saying about the historical Jesus?. Paulist Press. p. 102. ISBN 978-0-8091-4445-7.
Charlesworth, James H., ed. (2006). "Jesus and Archaeology". Jesus and archaeology. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 127. ISBN 978-0-8028-4880-2.
Maier 1989, pp. 115–18.
Niswonger 1992, pp. 121–22.
Köstenberger, Kellum & Quarles 2009, pp. 137–38.
Niswonger 1992, pp. 122–24.
Vermes, Géza (2010). The Nativity: History and Legend. Random House Digital. pp. 81–82. ISBN 978-0-307-49918-9.
Dunn 2003, p. 324.
Köstenberger, Kellum & Quarles 2009, p. 140.
Freedman 2000, p. 249.
Maier 1989, pp. 120–21.
Maier 1989, p. 123.
Evans, Craig (2006). "Josephus on John the Baptist". In Levine, Amy-Jill; Allison, Dale C.; Crossan, John D. The Historical Jesus in Context. Princeton University Press. pp. 55–58. ISBN 978-0-691-00992-6.
Gillman, Florence M. (2003). Herodias: at home in that fox's den. Liturgical Press. pp. 25–30. ISBN 978-0-8146-5108-7.
Köstenberger, Kellum & Quarles 2009, p. 398.
Theissen & Merz 1998, pp. 81–83.
Green, Joel B. (1997). The gospel of Luke: New International Commentary on the New Testament Series. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 168. ISBN 978-0-8028-2315-1.
Carter 2003, pp. 44–45.
Köstenberger, Kellum & Quarles 2009, pp. 398–400.
Barnett, Paul (2002). Jesus & the Rise of Early Christianity: A History of New Testament Times. InterVarsity Press. p. 21. ISBN 978-0-8308-2699-5.
Pratt, J. P. (1991). "Newton's Date for the Crucifixion". Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society. 32: 301–04. Bibcode:1991QJRAS..32..301P.
White, L. Michael (2010). Scripting Jesus: The Gospels in Rewrite. HarperOne.
Brown, Raymond E. (1978). Mary in the New Testament. Paulist Press. p. 64. ISBN 9780809121687.
Theissen & Merz 1998, p. 194.
Funk, Robert W. and the Jesus Seminar. The acts of Jesus: the search for the authentic deeds of Jesus. HarperSanFrancisco. 1998. "Mark," pp. 51–161
Cross, & Livingstone 2005, James, St..
Vermes 1981, p. 283.
Bromiley, Geoffrey (1995) International Standard Bible Encyclopedia, Eerdmans Publishing, ISBN 978-0-8028-3784-4, p. 991.
Craig S. Keener, The Gospel of Matthew (Eerdmans 2009 ISBN 978-0-8028-6498-7), p. 83
Donald A. Hagner, Matthew 1–13 (Paternoster Press 1993 ISBN 978-0-8499-0232-1), pp. 14–15, cited in the preceding
Millard Erickson, Christian Theology (Baker Academic 1998 ISBN 978-0-8010-2182-4), p. 761
Fritz Allhoff, Scott C. Lowe, Christmas – Philosophy for Everyone: Better Than a Lump of Coal (Wiley-Blackwell 2010 ISBN 978-1-4443-3090-8), p. 28
Frederick Dale Bruner, Matthew: The Christbook (Eerdmans 2004 ISBN 9780802811189), p. 41
Sanders 1993, pp. 85–88.
Theissen & Merz 1998, p. 196.
Funk, Robert W. and the Jesus Seminar. The acts of Jesus: the search for the authentic deeds of Jesus. HarperSanFrancisco. 1998. "Birth & Infancy Stories" pp. 497–526.
Powell 1998, p. 47.
Murphy, Catherine (2003). John the Baptist: Prophet of Purity for a New Age. Liturgical Press. pp. 29–30. ISBN 978-0-8146-5933-5.
Theissen & Merz 1998, p. 235.
Borg, Marcus J. (2006). "The Spirit-Filled Experience of Jesus". In Dunn, James D. G.; McKnight, Scot. The Historical Jesus in Recent Research. Eisenbrauns. p. 303. ISBN 978-1-57506-100-9.
Sanders 1993, pp. 205–23.
Ehrman 1999, pp. 167–70.
Ehrman 1999, pp. 164–67.
Ehrman 1999, pp. 171–76.
Funk, Robert W., Roy W. Hoover, and the Jesus Seminar. The five gospels. HarperSanFrancisco. 1993. p. 294
Theissen & Merz 1998, p. 310.
Sanders 1993, p. 10.
Ehrman 1999, pp. 186–87.
Sanders 1993, pp. 123–24.
Sanders 1993, pp. 230–36.
Theissen & Merz 1998, p. 336.
Cross & Livingstone 2005, Messiah.
Theissen & Merz 1998, pp. 533–40.
Ehrman, Bart (December 1, 2015). "Judas and the Messianic Secret". The Bart Ehrman Blog.
Ehrman, Bart (December 1, 2015). "Jesus' Claim to be the Messiah". The Bart Ehrman Blog.
Sanders 1993, pp. 254–62.
Sanders 1993, pp. 263–64.
Theissen & Merz 1998, pp. 465–66.
Sanders 1993, pp. 269–73.
Meier 2006, pp. 126–28.
Sanders 1993.
Sanders 1993, pp. 276–81.
Theissen & Winter 2002, pp. 4–5.
Theissen & Winter 2002, p. 5.
Cross & Livingstone 2005, Historical Jesus, Quest of the.
Theissen & Merz 1998, pp. 1–15.
Mitchell, Margaret M.; Young, Frances M. (2006). The Cambridge History of Christianity. 1. Cambridge University Press. p. 23. ISBN 978-0-521-81239-9.
Köstenberger, Kellum & Quarles 2009, pp. 124–25.
Brown, Colin (2011). "Why Study the Historical Jesus?". In Holmen, Tom; Porter, Stanley E. Handbook for the Study of the Historical Jesus. Brill. p. 1416. ISBN 978-90-04-16372-0.
Houlden 2006, pp. 63–99.
Erricker, Clive (1987). Teaching Christianity: a world religions approach. James Clarke & Co. p. 44. ISBN 978-0-7188-2634-5.
Green, McKnight & Marshall 1992, p. 442.
Barr, James (1970). "Which language did Jesus speak". Bulletin of the John Rylands University Library of Manchester. 53 (1): 9–29.
Porter, Stanley E. (1997). Handbook to exegesis of the New Testament. Brill. pp. 110–12. ISBN 978-90-04-09921-0.
Dunn 2003, pp. 313–15.
Ehrman 1999, p. 96.
Stoutzenberger, Joseph (2000). Celebrating sacraments. St Mary's Press. p. 286.
Elliott, John (2007). "Jesus the Israelite Was Neither a 'Jew' nor a 'Christian': On Correcting Misleading Nomenclature". Journal for the Study of the Historical Jesus. 5 (119): 119. doi:10.1177/1476869007079741.
Garroway, Rabbi Joshua (2011). "Ioudaios". In Amy-Jill Levine, Marc Z. Brettler. The Jewish Annotated New Testament. Oxford University Press. pp. 524–26. ISBN 9780195297706.
Miller, David M. (2010). "The Meaning of Ioudaios and its Relationship to Other Group Labels in Ancient 'Judaism'". Currents in Biblical Research. 9 (1): 98–126.
Mason, Steve (2007). "Jews, Judaeans, Judaizing, Judaism: Problems of Categorization in Ancient History" (PDF). Journal for the Study of Judaism. 38 (4): 457–512. doi:10.1163/156851507X193108. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 25, 2015.
Levine 2006, p. 10.
Jensen, Robin M. (2010). "Jesus in Christian art". In Burkett, Delbert. The Blackwell Companion to Jesus. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 477–502. ISBN 978-1-4443-5175-0.
Perkinson, Stephen (2009). The likeness of the king: a prehistory of portraiture in late medieval France. University of Chicago Press. p. 30. ISBN 978-0-226-65879-7.
Kidd, Colin (2006). The forging of races: race and scripture in the Protestant Atlantic world. Cambridge University Press. pp. 48–51. ISBN 978-1-139-45753-8.
Gibson, David (February 21, 2004). "What Did Jesus Really Look Like?". New York Times.
Bart Ehrman, Did Jesus Exist? Harper Collins, 2012, p. 12
Theissen & Merz 1998, pp. 113–15.
Theissen & Merz 1998, p. 90.
James D. G. Dunn "Paul's understanding of the death of Jesus" in Sacrifice and Redemption edited by S. W. Sykes (December 3, 2007) Cambridge University Press ISBN 052104460X pp. 35–36
Jesus Now and Then by Richard A. Burridge and Graham Gould (April 1, 2004) ISBN 0802809774 p. 34
Jesus by Michael Grant 2004 ISBN 1898799881 p. 200
The Gospels and Jesus by Graham Stanton, 1989 ISBN 0192132415 Oxford University Press, p. 145
Robert E. Van Voorst Jesus Outside the New Testament: An Introduction to the Ancient Evidence Eerdmans Publishing, 2000. ISBN 0-8028-4368-9 p. 16
Did Jesus Exist?:The Historical Argument for Jesus of Nazareth. HarperCollins. 2012. ISBN 978-0-06-220460-8.
B. Ehrman, 2011 Forged : writing in the name of God ISBN 978-0-06-207863-6. p. 285
Watson, Francis (2001). "The quest for the real Jesus". In Bockmuehl, Markus N. A. Cambridge companion to Jesus. Cambridge University Press. pp. 156–57. ISBN 978-0-521-79678-1.
Evans, C. Stephen (1996). The historical Christ and the Jesus of faith. Oxford University Press. p. v. ISBN 978-0-19-152042-6.
Delbert, Burkett (2010). The Blackwell Companion to Jesus. John Wiley & Sons. p. 1. ISBN 978-1-4443-5175-0.
Jackson, Gregory L. (1993). Catholic, Lutheran, Protestant: a doctrinal comparison. Christian News. pp. 11–17. ISBN 978-0-615-16635-3.
McGuckin, John A. (2010). The Orthodox Church: An Introduction to Its History, Doctrine. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 6–7. ISBN 978-1-4443-9383-5.
Leith, John H. (1993). Basic Christian doctrine. Westminster John Knox Press. pp. 1–2. ISBN 978-0-664-25192-5.
Schreiner, Thomas R. (2008). New Testament Theology: Magnifying God in Christ. Baker Academic. pp. 23–37. ISBN 978-0-8010-2680-5.
Cross & Livingstone 2005, Great Schism.
"The Letter of Paul to the Corinthians". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved June 26, 2013.
Cullmann, Oscar (1959). The Christology of the New Testament. Westminster John Knox Press. p. 79. ISBN 978-0-664-24351-7.
Deme, Dániel (2004). The Christology of Anselm of Canterbury. Ashgate Publishing. pp. 199–200. ISBN 978-0-7546-3779-0.
Pannenberg, Wolfhart (2004). Systematic Theology. 2. Continuum. pp. 297–303. ISBN 978-0-567-08466-8.
Cross & Livingstone 2005, Antitrinitarianism.
Friedmann, Robert. "Antitrinitarianism". Global Anabaptist Mennonite Encyclopedia. Retrieved October 24, 2012.
Wikisource-logo.svg Joyce, George H. (1913). "Blessed Trinity". In Herbermann, Charles. Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.
"Mormonism 101: What is Mormonism", MormonNewsroom.org, LDS Church, retrieved October 21, 2014
Hunter, Sylvester (2010). Outlines of dogmatic theology. 2. Nabu Press. p. 443. ISBN 978-1-177-95809-7.
Houlden 2006, p. 426.
Kessler, Ed. "Jesus the Jew". BBC. Retrieved June 18, 2013.
Norman, Asher (2007). Twenty-six reasons why Jews don't believe in Jesus. Feldheim Publishers. pp. 59–70. ISBN 978-0-9771937-0-7.
Simmons, Rabbi Shraga, "Why Jews Don't Believe in Jesus". Accessed December 22, 2011.
Simmons, Shraga (March 6, 2004). "Why Jews Do not Believe in Jesus". Aish.com.
"Malachi, Book of". Jewish Encyclopedia. Retrieved July 3, 2013.
"Talmud". Jewish Encyclopedia. Retrieved July 3, 2013.
"Jesus". Jewishvirtuallibrary.org. Retrieved May 20, 2016.
Kessler, Edward; Wenborn, Neil (2005). A Dictionary of Jewish-Christian Relations. Cambridge University Press. p. 416. ISBN 978-1-139-44750-8.
Theissen & Merz 1998, pp. 74–75.
Jeffrey, Grant R. (2009). Heaven: The Mystery of Angels. Random House Digital. p. 108. ISBN 978-0-307-50940-6.
Adam Sutcliffe (10 November 2005). Judaism and Enlightenment. Cambridge University Press. pp. 141–. ISBN 978-0-521-67232-0.
Esposito, John L. (2003). The Oxford Dictionary of Islam. Oxford University Press. p. 158. ISBN 978-0-19-975726-8.
Paget, James C. (2001). "Quests for the historical Jesus". In Bockmuehl, Markus N. A. Cambridge companion to Jesus. Cambridge University Press. p. 183. ISBN 978-0-521-79678-1.
Ashraf, Irshad (Director) (August 19, 2007). The Muslim Jesus (Television production). ITV Productions.
"Jesus, Son of Mary". Oxford Islamic Studies Online. Retrieved July 3, 2013.
Aboul-Enein, Youssef H. (2010). Militant Islamist Ideology: Understanding the Global Threat. Naval Institute Press. p. 20. ISBN 978-1-61251-015-6.
Fasching, Darrell J.; deChant, Dell (2001). Comparative Religious Ethics: A Narrative Approach. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 241, 274–75. ISBN 978-0-631-20125-0.
George, Timothy (2002). Is the Father of Jesus the God of Muhammad?: Understanding the Differences Between Christianity and Islam. Zondervan. pp. 150–51. ISBN 978-0-310-24748-7.
Shedinger, Robert F. (2009). Was Jesus a Muslim?: Questioning Categories in the Study of Religion. Fortress Press. p. ix. ISBN 978-1-4514-1727-2.
Burns, Robert A. (2011). Christianity, Islam, and the West. University Press of America. p. 32. ISBN 978-0-7618-5560-6.
Peters, F. E. (2003). Islam: A Guide for Jews and Christians. Princeton University Press. p. 23. ISBN 978-0-691-11553-5.
Cooper, Anne; Maxwell, Elsie A. (2003). Ishmael My Brother: A Christian Introduction To Islam. Monarch Books. p. 59. ISBN 978-0-8254-6223-8.
"The Quranic Arabic Corpus – Translation". Corpus.quran.com. Retrieved May 20, 2016.
Quran 4:157
Khalidi, Tarif (2001). The Muslim Jesus: Sayings and Stories in Islamic Literature. Harvard University Press. p. 12. ISBN 9780674004771.
Religions of the World: A Comprehensive Encyclopedia of Beliefs and Practices. ABC-CLIO. 2010-09-21. p. 55. ISBN 978-1-59884-203-6.
Stockman, Robert (1992). "Jesus Christ in the Bahá'í Writings". Bahá'í Studies Review. 2 (1).
Cole, Juan (1982). "The Concept of Manifestation in the Bahá'í Writings". Bahá'í Studies. 9: 1–38.
Smith, Peter (2000). "peace". A concise encyclopedia of the Bahá'í Faith. Oneworld Publications. p. 214. ISBN 978-1-85168-184-6.
Smith, Peter (2008). An Introduction to the Baha'i Faith. Cambridge University Press. p. 128. ISBN 978-0-521-86251-6.
Lepard, Brian D. (2008). In the Glory of the Father: The Bahai Faith and Christianity. Bahai Publishing. p. 118. ISBN 978-1-931847-34-6.
Cole, Juan R. I. (1997). "Behold the Man: Baha'u'llah on the Life of Jesus". Journal of the American Academy of Religion. 65 (1): 51, 56, 60.
McManners, John (2001). The Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity. Oxford University Press. p. 27. ISBN 978-0-19-285439-1.
Ehrman, Bart D. (2003). Lost Christianities: The Battles For Scripture And The Faiths We Never Knew. Oxford University Press. pp. 124–25. ISBN 978-0-19-518249-1.
Bevan, A. A. (1930). Hastings, James, ed. Manichaeism. Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics. 8. Kessinger Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7661-3666-3.
Brown, Peter R. L. (2000). Augustine of Hippo: A Biography. University of California Press. p. 43. ISBN 978-0-520-22757-6.
Rishi Das, Shaunaka (March 24, 2009). "Jesus in Hinduism". BBC.
Yogananda, Paramahansa (2008). Autobiography of a Yogi. Diamond Pocket Books. ISBN 978-81-902562-0-9.
Beverley, James A. (June 11, 2011). "Hollywood's Idol". Christianity Today.
Hutson, Steven (2006). What They Never Taught You in Sunday School: A Fresh Look at Following Jesus. City Boy Enterprises. p. 57. ISBN 978-1-59886-300-0.
Pike, Sarah M. (2004). New Age and neopagan religions in America. Columbia University Press. p. 56. ISBN 978-0-231-12402-7.
Bailey, Alice; Khul, Djwhal (2005). A Treatise on Cosmic Fire. Lucis Publishing Company. pp. 678, 1150, 1193. ISBN 978-0-85330-117-2.
"What Is Scientology's View of Moses, Jesus, Muhammad, The Buddha and Other Religious Figures of the Past?". Church of Scientology International. Retrieved June 13, 2013.
Hallowell, Billy (October 25, 2011). "Richard Dawkins: 'Jesus Would Have Been an Atheist if He Had Known What We Know Today'". TheBlaze.
Dawkins, Richard. The God Delusion. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. p. 284. Retrieved December 13, 2014.
Hitchens, Christopher (2001). Letters to a Young Contrarian. Basic Books. p. 58. ISBN 9780465030323.
"Dura-Europos: Excavating Antiquity | Yale University Art Gallery". media.artgallery.yale.edu.
Gutmann, Joseph (1992). "Early Christian and Jewish Art". In Attridge, Harold W.; Hata, Gohei. Eusebius, Christianity, and Judaism. Wayne State University Press. pp. 283–84. ISBN 0814323618.
Benedetto, Robert (2006). The New Westminster Dictionary of Church History. Westminster John Knox Press. pp. 51–53. ISBN 978-0-664-22416-5.
Schaff, Phillip (July 1, 2006). History of the Christian Church,8 volumes, 3rd edition. Massachusetts: Hendrickson Publishers. ISBN 9781565631960.
Synod of Elvira, 'Pictures are not to be placed in churches, so that they do not become objects of worship and adoration', AD 306, Canon 36
Cross & Livingstone 2005, Icons.
Michalski, Sergiusz (1993). Reformation and the Visual Arts. Routledge. p. 195. ISBN 978-1-134-92102-7.
Payton, James R. (2007). Light from the Christian East: An Introduction to the Orthodox Tradition. InterVarsity Press. pp. 178–79. ISBN 978-0-8308-2594-3.
Williams, Rowan (2003). The Dwelling of the Light: Praying with Icons of Christ. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 83. ISBN 978-0-8028-2778-4.
Wojtyła, Karol J. "General audience 29 October 1997". Vatican Publishing House. Retrieved April 20, 2013.
Ratzinger, Joseph A. "General audience 6 May 2009". Vatican Publishing House. Retrieved April 20, 2013.
Doninger 1999, p. 231.
Casiday, Augustine (2012). The Orthodox Christian World. Routledge. p. 447. ISBN 978-0-415-45516-9.
Bigham, Steven (1995). The image of God the Father in Orthodox theology and iconography. St Vladimir's Seminary Press. pp. 226–27. ISBN 978-1-879038-15-8.
Cross & Livingstone 2005, Crucifix.
"Creche." Encyclopædia Britannica Online. Retrieved March 16, 2015.
Levine 2006, pp. 24–25.
Helmut Koester Introduction to the New Testament, Vol. 1: History, Culture, and Religion of the Hellenistic Age. Berlin: de Gruyter Press, 1995 p. 382
Flavius Josephus, The Jewish War Book VII, section 1.1"
Margaret M. Mitchell "The Cambridge History of Christianity, Volume 1: Origins to Constantine" Cambridge University Press 2006 p. 298
Nickell, Joe (2007). Relics of the Christ. University Press of Kentucky. p. 191. ISBN 978-0-8131-3731-5.
Habermas, Gary R. "Shroud of Turin." The Encyclopedia of Christian Civilization (2011). doi:10.1002/9780470670606.wbecc1257
Ball, P. (2008). "Material witness: Shrouded in mystery". Nature Materials. 7 (5): 349. Bibcode:2008NatMa...7..349B. doi:10.1038/nmat2170. PMID 18432204.
Dillenberger 1999, p. 5.
Wikisource-logo.svg Thurston, Herbert (1913). "Holy Nails". In Herbermann, Charles. Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.
Delaney, Sarah (May 24, 2010). "Shroud exposition closes with more than 2 million visits". Catholic News Service. Archived from the original on June 8, 2010.
Wojtyła, Karol J. (May 24, 1998). "Pope John Paul II's address in Turin Cathedral". Vatican Publishing House.
Squires, Nick (May 3, 2010). "Pope Benedict says Shroud of Turin authentic burial robe of Jesus". Christian Science Monitor.
Bibliography
Blomberg, Craig L. (2009). Jesus and the Gospels: An Introduction and Survey. B&H Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-8054-4482-7.
Boring, M. Eugene; Craddock, Fred B. (2004). The people's New Testament commentary. Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 978-0-664-22754-8.
Brown, Raymond E. (1988). The Gospel and Epistles of John: A Concise Commentary. Liturgical Press. ISBN 978-0-8146-1283-5.
Brown, Raymond E. (1978). Mary in the New Testament. Paulist Press. ISBN 978-0-8091-2168-7.
Brown, Raymond E. (1988). The Gospel and Epistles of John: A Concise Commentary. Liturgical Press. ISBN 978-0-8146-1283-5.
Brown, Raymond E. (1997). An Introduction to the New Testament. Doubleday. ISBN 978-0-385-24767-2.
Carter, Warren (2003). Pontius Pilate: portraits of a Roman governor. Liturgical Press. ISBN 978-0-8146-5113-1.
Chilton, Bruce; Evans, Craig A. (1998). Studying the Historical Jesus: Evaluations of the State of Current Research. Brill. ISBN 978-90-04-11142-4.
Cox, Steven L.; Easley, Kendell H (2007). Harmony of the Gospels. B&H Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-8054-9444-0.
Cross, Frank L.; Livingstone, E. A., eds. (2005). Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780192802903.
Crossan, John D.; Watts, Richard G. (1999). Who Is Jesus?: Answers to Your Questions About the Historical Jesus. Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 978-0-664-25842-9.
Dickson, John (2008). Jesus: A Short Life. Kregel Publications. ISBN 978-0-8254-7802-4.
Dillenberger, John (1999). Images and Relics : Theological Perceptions and Visual Images in Sixteenth-Century Europe: Theological Perceptions and Visual Images in Sixteenth-Century Europe. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-976146-3.
Donahue, John R.; Harrington, Daniel J. (2002). The Gospel of Mark. Liturgical Press. ISBN 978-0-8146-5804-8.
Doninger, Wendy (1999). Merriam-Webster's Encyclopedia of World Religions. Merriam-Webster. ISBN 978-0-87779-044-0.
Dunn, James D. G. (2003). Jesus Remembered. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. ISBN 978-0-8028-3931-2.
Eddy, Paul R.; Boyd, Gregory A. (2007). The Jesus legend: a case for the historical reliability of the synoptic Jesus tradition. Baker Academic. ISBN 978-0-8010-3114-4.
Ehrman, Bart (1999). Jesus: Apocalyptic Prophet of the New Millennium. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-983943-8.
Evans, Craig A. (2003). The Bible Knowledge Background Commentary: Matthew-Luke. David C. Cook. ISBN 978-0-7814-3868-1.
Evans, Craig A. (2005). The Bible Knowledge Background Commentary: John's Gospel, Hebrews-Revelation. David C. Cook. ISBN 978-0-7814-4228-2.
Evans, Craig A. (2012). Jesus and His World: The Archaeological Evidence. Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 978-0-664-23413-3.
France, R. T. (2007). The Gospel of Matthew. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. ISBN 978-0-8028-2501-8.
Freedman, David N. (2000). Eerdmans Dictionary of the Bible. Amsterdam University Press. ISBN 978-0-8028-2400-4.
Funk, Robert W.; Hoover, Roy W. (1993). The Five Gospels. Harper.
Green, Joel B.; McKnight, Scot; Marshall, I. Howard (1992). Dictionary of Jesus and the Gospels. InterVarsity Press. p. 442. ISBN 978-0-8308-1777-1.
Grudem, Wayne (1994). Systematic Theology: An Introduction to Biblical Doctrine. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan. ISBN 978-0-310-28670-7.
Harris, Stephen L. (1985). Understanding the Bible. Mayfield.
Houlden, J. Leslie (2006). Jesus: the complete guide. Continuum. ISBN 978-0-8264-8011-8.
Köstenberger, Andreas J.; Kellum, L. Scott; Quarles, Charles L (2009). The Cradle, the Cross, and the Crown: An Introduction to the New Testament. B&H Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-8054-4365-3.
Lee, Dorothy A. (2004). Transfiguration. Continuum. ISBN 978-0-8264-7595-4.
Levine, Amy-Jill (2006). "Introduction". In Levine, Amy-Jill; Allison, Dale C.; Crossan, John D. The Historical Jesus in Context. Princeton Univ Press. ISBN 978-0-691-00992-6.
Licona, Michael R. (2010). The Resurrection of Jesus: A New Historiographical Approach. InterVarsity Press. ISBN 978-0-8308-2719-0.
Maier, Paul L. (1989). "The Date of the Nativity and Chronology of Jesus". In Finegan, Jack; Vardaman, Jerry; Yamauchi, Edwin M. Chronos, kairos, Christos: nativity and chronological studies. Eisenbrauns. ISBN 978-0-931464-50-8.
Majerník, Ján; Ponessa, Joseph; Manhardt, Laurie W. (2005). The Synoptics: Matthew, Mark, Luke. Emmaus Road Publishing. ISBN 978-1-931018-31-9.
McGrath, Alister E. (2006). Christianity: An Introduction. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 4–6. ISBN 978-1-4051-0899-7.
Meier, John P. (2006). "How do we decide what comes from Jesus". In Dunn, James D. G.; McKnight, Scot. The Historical Jesus in Recent Research. Eisenbrauns. ISBN 978-1-57506-100-9.
Mills, Watson E.; Bullard, Roger A. (1998). Mercer dictionary of the Bible. Mercer University Press. ISBN 978-0-86554-373-7.
Morris, Leon (1992). The Gospel according to Matthew. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. ISBN 978-0-85111-338-8.
Niswonger, Richard L. (1992). New Testament History. Zondervan. ISBN 978-0-310-31201-7.
Pannenberg, Wolfhart (1968). Jesus – God and Man. S.C.M. Press. ISBN 978-0-334-00783-8.
Powell, Mark A. (1998). Jesus as a Figure in History: How Modern Historians View the Man from Galilee. Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 978-0-664-25703-3.
Rahner, Karl (2004). Encyclopedia of theology: a concise Sacramentum mundi. Continuum. ISBN 978-0-86012-006-3.
Rausch, Thomas P. (2003). Who is Jesus?: an introduction to Christology. Liturgical Press. ISBN 978-0-8146-5078-3.
Redford, Douglas (2007). The Life and Ministry of Jesus: The Gospels. Standard Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7847-1900-8.
Reed, Jonathan L. (2002). Archaeology and the Galilean Jesus: a re-examination of the evidence. Continuum. ISBN 978-1-56338-394-6.
Sanders, Ed P. (1993). The Historical Figure of Jesus. Allen Lane Penguin Press. ISBN 9780141928227.
Stanton, Graham (2002). The Gospels and Jesus. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-00802-0.
Theissen, Gerd; Merz, Annette (1998). The Historical Jesus : a Comprehensive Guide. Fortress Press. ISBN 978-1-4514-0863-8.
Theissen, Gerd; Winter, Dagmar (2002). The Quest for the Plausible Jesus: The Question of Criteria. Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 978-0-664-22537-7.
Twelftree, Graham H. (1999). Jesus the miracle worker: a historical & theological study. InterVarsity Press. ISBN 978-0-8308-1596-8.
Van Voorst, Robert E (2000). Jesus Outside the New Testament: An Introduction to the Ancient Evidence. Eerdmans Publishing. ISBN 978-0-8028-4368-5.
Vine, William E. (1940). Expository Dictionary of New Testament Words. Fleming H. Revell Company. ISBN 978-0-916441-31-9.
Vermes, Geza (1981). Jesus the Jew: A Historian's Reading of the Gospels. Philadelphia: First Fortress. ISBN 0-8006-1443-7.
Vermes, Geza (2003). The Authentic Gospel of Jesus. London: Penguin. ISBN 014100360X.
Walvoord, John F.; Zuck, Roy B. (1983). The Bible Knowledge Commentary: New Testament. David C. Cook. ISBN 978-0-88207-812-0.
Wilson, Barrie A (2007). How Jesus Became Christian. New York: St.Martin's Press. ISBN 978-0-679-31493-6.
Witherington, Ben (1997). The Jesus Quest: The Third Search for the Jew of Nazareth. InterVarsity Press. ISBN 978-0-8308-1544-9.
External links
Jesus at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Complete Sayings of Jesus Christ in parallel Latin and English.
Works by or about Jesus in libraries (WorldCat catalog)
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jesus&oldid=839611991"
This page was last edited on 4 May 2018, at 15:08.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Christianity
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Christianity[note 1] is an Abrahamic monotheistic[1] religion based on the life, teachings, and miracles of Jesus of Nazareth, known by Christians as the Christ, or "Messiah", who is the focal point of the Christian faiths. It is the world's largest religion,[2][3] with over 2.4 billion followers,[4][5][6] or 33% of the global population, known as Christians.[note 2] Christians make up a majority of the population in about two-thirds of the countries and territories in the world.[6] They believe that Jesus is the Son of God and the savior of humanity whose coming as the Messiah (the Christ) was prophesied in the Old Testament.[7] Christianity has played a prominent role in the shaping of Western civilization.[8][9][10][11][12]
Christianity grew out of Judaism[13][14][15] and began as a Second Temple Judaic sect in the mid-1st century.[16][17] Originating in the Roman province of Judea, it quickly spread to Syria, Europe, Anatolia, Mesopotamia, Transcaucasia, Egypt, Ethiopia and the Indian subcontinent, and by the end of the 4th century had become the official state church of the Roman Empire.[18][19][20] Following the Age of Discovery, Christianity spread to the Americas, Oceania, sub-Saharan Africa and the rest of the world through missionary work and colonization.[21][22][23]
Christian theology is summarized in creeds such as the Apostles' Creed and the Nicene Creed. These professions of faith state that Jesus suffered, died, was buried, descended into hell, and rose from the dead, in order to grant eternal life to those who believe in him and trust in him for the remission of their sins. The creeds further maintain that Jesus physically ascended into heaven, where he reigns with God the Father in the unity of the Holy Spirit, and that he will return to judge the living and the dead and grant eternal life to his followers. His incarnation, earthly ministry, crucifixion and resurrection are often referred to as "the gospel", meaning "good news".[note 3] The term gospel also refers to written accounts of Jesus' life and teaching, four of which—Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John—are considered canonical and included in the Christian Bible, as established by the 5th century[24] for the ancient undivided Catholic and Eastern Orthodox traditions before the East–West Schism.
Throughout its history, Christianity has weathered schisms and theological disputes that have resulted in many distinct churches and denominations. Worldwide, the three largest branches of Christianity are the Catholic Church, Protestantism, and the Eastern Orthodox Church. The Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches broke communion with each other in the East–West Schism of 1054. Protestantism came into existence in the Reformation in the 16th century, splitting from the Catholic Church.[25]
Contents
1	Beliefs
1.1	Creeds
1.2	Jesus
1.3	Salvation
1.4	Trinity
1.5	Scriptures
1.6	Eschatology
2	Worship
2.1	Sacraments
2.2	Liturgical calendar
2.3	Symbols
2.4	Baptism
2.5	Prayer
3	History
3.1	Early Church and Christological Councils
3.2	Early Middle Ages
3.3	High and Late Middle Ages
3.4	Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation
3.5	Post-Enlightenment
4	Demographics
5	Major divisions
5.1	Catholic Church
5.2	Eastern Orthodox Church
5.3	Oriental Orthodoxy
5.4	Assyrian Church of the East
5.5	Protestantism
5.6	Restorationism
5.7	Other
6	Christian culture
7	Ecumenism
8	Criticism and apologetics
9	See also
10	Notes
11	References
11.1	Bibliography
12	Further reading
13	External links
Beliefs
There are many important differences of interpretation and opinion of the Bible and sacred tradition on which Christianity is based.[26] Because of these irreconcilable differences in theology and a lack of consensus on the core tenets of Christianity, Catholics, Protestants and Orthodox often deny that members of certain other branches are Christians.[27]
Creeds
Concise doctrinal statements or confessions of religious beliefs are known as creeds (from Latin credo, meaning "I believe"). They began as baptismal formulae and were later expanded during the Christological controversies of the 4th and 5th centuries to become statements of faith.
Many evangelical Protestants reject creeds as definitive statements of faith, even while agreeing with some or all of the substance of the creeds. The Baptists have been non-creedal "in that they have not sought to establish binding authoritative confessions of faith on one another."[28]:p.111 Also rejecting creeds are groups with roots in the Restoration Movement, such as the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), the Evangelical Christian Church in Canada and the Churches of Christ.[29][30]:14–15[31]:123
An Eastern Christian icon depicting Emperor Constantine and the Fathers of the First Council of Nicaea (325) as holding the Niceno–Constantinopolitan Creed of 381
The Apostles' Creed is the most widely accepted statement of the articles of Christian faith. It is used by a number of Christian denominations for both liturgical and catechetical purposes, most visibly by liturgical churches of Western Christian tradition, including the Latin Church of the Catholic Church, Lutheranism, Anglicanism and Western Rite Orthodoxy. It is also used by Presbyterians, Methodists and Congregationalists. This particular creed was developed between the 2nd and 9th centuries. Its central doctrines are those of the Trinity and God the Creator. Each of the doctrines found in this creed can be traced to statements current in the apostolic period. The creed was apparently used as a summary of Christian doctrine for baptismal candidates in the churches of Rome.[32]
Its main points include:
Belief in God the Father, Jesus Christ as the Son of God, and the Holy Spirit
The death, descent into hell, resurrection and ascension of Christ
The holiness of the Church and the communion of saints
Christ's second coming, the Day of Judgement and salvation of the faithful.
The Nicene Creed was formulated, largely in response to Arianism, at the Councils of Nicaea and Constantinople in 325 and 381 respectively [33][34] and ratified as the universal creed of Christendom by the First Council of Ephesus in 431.[35]
The Chalcedonian Definition, or Creed of Chalcedon, developed at the Council of Chalcedon in 451,[36] though rejected by the Oriental Orthodox churches,[37] taught Christ "to be acknowledged in two natures, inconfusedly, unchangeably, indivisibly, inseparably": one divine and one human, and that both natures, while perfect in themselves, are nevertheless also perfectly united into one person.[38]
The Athanasian Creed, received in the Western Church as having the same status as the Nicene and Chalcedonian, says: "We worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity; neither confounding the Persons nor dividing the Substance."[39]
Most Christians (Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox and Protestant alike) accept the use of creeds, and subscribe to at least one of the creeds mentioned above.[40]
Jesus
Various depictions of Jesus
The central tenet of Christianity is the belief in Jesus as the Son of God and the Messiah (Christ). Christians believe that Jesus, as the Messiah, was anointed by God as savior of humanity and hold that Jesus' coming was the fulfillment of messianic prophecies of the Old Testament. The Christian concept of the Messiah differs significantly from the contemporary Jewish concept. The core Christian belief is that through belief in and acceptance of the death and resurrection of Jesus, sinful humans can be reconciled to God and thereby are offered salvation and the promise of eternal life.[41]
While there have been many theological disputes over the nature of Jesus over the earliest centuries of Christian history, generally Christians believe that Jesus is God incarnate and "true God and true man" (or both fully divine and fully human). Jesus, having become fully human, suffered the pains and temptations of a mortal man, but did not sin. As fully God, he rose to life again. According to the New Testament, he rose from the dead,[42] ascended to heaven, is seated at the right hand of the Father[43] and will ultimately return[Acts 1:9–11] to fulfill the rest of Messianic prophecy, including the resurrection of the dead, the Last Judgment and final establishment of the Kingdom of God.
According to the canonical gospels of Matthew and Luke, Jesus was conceived by the Holy Spirit and born from the Virgin Mary. Little of Jesus' childhood is recorded in the canonical gospels, although infancy gospels were popular in antiquity. In comparison, his adulthood, especially the week before his death, is well documented in the gospels contained within the New Testament, because that part of his life is believed to be most important. The biblical accounts of Jesus' ministry include: his baptism, miracles, preaching, teaching and deeds.
Death and resurrection
Crucifixion, representing the death of Jesus on the Cross, painting by Diego Velázquez, 17th century
Christians consider the resurrection of Jesus to be the cornerstone of their faith (see 1 Corinthians 15) and the most important event in history.[44] Among Christian beliefs, the death and resurrection of Jesus are two core events on which much of Christian doctrine and theology is based.[45] According to the New Testament, Jesus was crucified, died a physical death, was buried within a tomb and rose from the dead three days later.[Jn. 19:30–31] [Mk. 16:1] [16:6]
The New Testament mentions several resurrection appearances of Jesus on different occasions to his twelve apostles and disciples, including "more than five hundred brethren at once",[1Cor 15:6] before Jesus' Ascension to heaven. Jesus' death and resurrection are commemorated by Christians in all worship services, with special emphasis during Holy Week which includes Good Friday and Easter Sunday.
The death and resurrection of Jesus are usually considered the most important events in Christian theology, partly because they demonstrate that Jesus has power over life and death and therefore has the authority and power to give people eternal life.[46]
Christian churches accept and teach the New Testament account of the resurrection of Jesus with very few exceptions.[47] Some modern scholars use the belief of Jesus' followers in the resurrection as a point of departure for establishing the continuity of the historical Jesus and the proclamation of the early church.[48] Some liberal Christians do not accept a literal bodily resurrection,[49][50] seeing the story as richly symbolic and spiritually nourishing myth. Arguments over death and resurrection claims occur at many religious debates and interfaith dialogues.[51] Paul the Apostle, an early Christian convert and missionary, wrote, "If Christ was not raised, then all our preaching is useless, and your trust in God is useless."[1Cor 15:14] [52]
Salvation
Paul the Apostle, like Jews and Roman pagans of his time, believed that sacrifice can bring about new kinship ties, purity and eternal life.[53] For Paul, the necessary sacrifice was the death of Jesus: Gentiles who are "Christ's" are, like Israel, descendants of Abraham and "heirs according to the promise".[Gal. 3:29] [54] The God who raised Jesus from the dead would also give new life to the "mortal bodies" of Gentile Christians, who had become with Israel the "children of God" and were therefore no longer "in the flesh".[Rom. 8:9,11,16] [53]
Modern Christian churches tend to be much more concerned with how humanity can be saved from a universal condition of sin and death than the question of how both Jews and Gentiles can be in God's family. According to both Catholic and Protestant doctrine, salvation comes by Jesus' substitutionary death and resurrection. The Catholic Church teaches that salvation does not occur without faithfulness on the part of Christians; converts must live in accordance with principles of love and ordinarily must be baptized.[55][56] Martin Luther taught that baptism was necessary for salvation, but modern Lutherans and other Protestants tend to teach that salvation is a gift that comes to an individual by God's grace, sometimes defined as "unmerited favor", even apart from baptism.
Christians differ in their views on the extent to which individuals' salvation is pre-ordained by God. Reformed theology places distinctive emphasis on grace by teaching that individuals are completely incapable of self-redemption, but that sanctifying grace is irresistible.[57] In contrast Catholics, Orthodox Christians and Arminian Protestants believe that the exercise of free will is necessary to have faith in Jesus.[58]
Trinity
The Trinity is the belief that God is one God in three persons: the Father, the Son (Jesus), and the Holy Spirit.[59]
Trinity refers to the teaching that the one God[1] comprises three distinct, eternally co-existing persons; the Father, the Son (incarnate in Jesus Christ) and the Holy Spirit. Together, these three persons are sometimes called the Godhead,[60][61][62] although there is no single term in use in Scripture to denote the unified Godhead.[63] In the words of the Athanasian Creed, an early statement of Christian belief, "the Father is God, the Son is God and the Holy Spirit is God, and yet there are not three Gods but one God".[64] They are distinct from another: the Father has no source, the Son is begotten of the Father and the Spirit proceeds from the Father. Though distinct, the three persons cannot be divided from one another in being or in operation. While some Christians also believe that God appeared as the Father in the Old Testament, it is agreed that he appeared as the Son in the New Testament, and will still continue to manifest as the Holy Spirit in the present. But still, God still existed as three persons in each of these times.[65] However, traditionally there is a belief that it was the Son who appeared in the Old Testament because, for example, when the Trinity is depicted in art, the Son typically has the distinctive appearance, a cruciform halo identifying Christ, and in depictions of the Garden of Eden this looks forward to an Incarnation yet to occur. In some Early Christian sarcophagi the Logos is distinguished with a beard, "which allows him to appear ancient, even preexistent."[66]
The Trinity is an essential doctrine of mainstream Christianity. From earlier than the times of the Nicene Creed, 325, Christianity advocated[67] the triune mystery-nature of God as a normative profession of faith. According to Roger E. Olson and Christopher Hall, through prayer, meditation, study and practice, the Christian community concluded "that God must exist as both a unity and trinity", codifying this in ecumenical council at the end of the 4th century.[68][69]
According to this doctrine, God is not divided in the sense that each person has a third of the whole; rather, each person is considered to be fully God (see Perichoresis). The distinction lies in their relations, the Father being unbegotten; the Son being begotten of the Father; and the Holy Spirit proceeding from the Father and (in Western Christian theology) from the Son. Regardless of this apparent difference, the three "persons" are each eternal and omnipotent. Other Christian religions including Unitarian Universalism, Jehovah's Witnesses, Mormonism and others do not share those views on the Trinity.
The Latin word trias, from which trinity is derived, is first seen in the works of Theophilus of Antioch. He wrote of "the Trinity of God (the Father), His Word (the Son) and His Wisdom (Holy Spirit)".[70] The term may have been in use before this time. Afterwards it appears in Tertullian.[71][72] In the following century the word was in general use. It is found in many passages of Origen.[73]
Trinitarians
Trinitarianism denotes those Christians who believe in the concept of the Trinity. Almost all Christian denominations and churches hold Trinitarian beliefs. Although the words "Trinity" and "Triune" do not appear in the Bible, theologians beginning in the 3rd century developed the term and concept to facilitate comprehension of the New Testament teachings of God as being Father, Son and Holy Spirit. Since that time, Christian theologians have been careful to emphasize that Trinity does not imply that there are three gods (the antitrinitarian heresy of Tritheism), nor that each hypostasis of the Trinity is one-third of an infinite God (partialism), nor that the Son and the Holy Spirit are beings created by and subordinate to the Father (Arianism). Rather, the Trinity is defined as one God in three Persons.[74]
Nontrinitarianism
Nontrinitarianism (or antitrinitarianism) refers to theology that rejects the doctrine of the Trinity. Various nontrinitarian views, such as adoptionism or modalism, existed in early Christianity, leading to the disputes about Christology.[75] Nontrinitarianism later appeared again in the Gnosticism of the Cathars in the 11th through 13th centuries, among groups with Unitarian theology in the Protestant Reformation of the 16th century,[76] in the 18th-century Enlightenment and in some groups arising during the Second Great Awakening of the 19th century.
Scriptures
The Bible is the sacred book in Christianity.
Christianity, like other religions, has adherents whose beliefs and biblical interpretations vary. Christianity regards the biblical canon, the Old Testament and the New Testament, as the inspired word of God. The traditional view of inspiration is that God worked through human authors so that what they produced was what God wished to communicate. The Greek word referring to inspiration in 2 Timothy 3:16 is theopneustos, which literally means "God-breathed".[77]
Some believe that divine inspiration makes our present Bibles inerrant. Others claim inerrancy for the Bible in its original manuscripts, although none of those are extant. Still others maintain that only a particular translation is inerrant, such as the King James Version.[78][79][80] Another closely related view is Biblical infallibility or limited inerrancy, which affirms that the Bible is free of error as a guide to salvation, but may include errors on matters such as history, geography or science.
The books of the Bible accepted by the Orthodox, Catholic and Protestant churches vary somewhat, with Jews accepting only the Hebrew Bible as canonical; there is however substantial overlap. These variations are a reflection of the range of traditions, and of the councils that have convened on the subject. Every version of the Old Testament always includes the books of the Tanakh, the canon of the Hebrew Bible. The Catholic and Orthodox canons, in addition to the Tanakh, also include the Deuterocanonical Books as part of the Old Testament. These books appear in the Septuagint, but are regarded by Protestants to be apocryphal. However, they are considered to be important historical documents which help to inform the understanding of words, grammar and syntax used in the historical period of their conception. Some versions of the Bible include a separate Apocrypha section between the Old Testament and the New Testament.[81] The New Testament, originally written in Koine Greek, contains 27 books which are agreed upon by all churches.
Modern scholarship has raised many issues with the Bible. While the Authorized King James Version is held to by many because of its striking English prose, in fact it was translated from the Erasmus Greek Bible which in turn "was based on a single 12th Century manuscript that is one of the worst manuscripts we have available to us".[82] Much scholarship in the past several hundred years has gone into comparing different manuscripts in order to reconstruct the original text. Another issue is that several books are considered to be forgeries. The injunction that women "be silent and submissive" in 1 Timothy 2[83] is thought by many to be a forgery by a follower of Paul, a similar phrase in 1 Corinthians 14,[84] which is thought to be by Paul, appears in different places in different manuscripts and is thought to originally be a margin note by a copyist.[82] Other verses in 1 Corinthians, such as 1 Corinthians 11:2–16 where women are instructed to wear a covering over their hair "when they pray or prophesies",[85] contradict this verse.
A final issue with the Bible is the way in which books were selected for inclusion in the New Testament. Other Gospels have now been recovered, such as those found near Nag Hammadi in 1945, and while some of these texts are quite different from what Christians have been used to, it should be understood that some of this newly recovered Gospel material is quite possibly contemporaneous with, or even earlier than, the New Testament Gospels. The core of the Gospel of Thomas, in particular, may date from as early as AD 50 (although some major scholars contest this early dating),[86] and if so would provide an insight into the earliest gospel texts that underlie the canonical Gospels, texts that are mentioned in Luke 1:1–2. The Gospel of Thomas contains much that is familiar from the canonical Gospels—verse 113, for example ("The Father's Kingdom is spread out upon the earth, but people do not see it"),[87] is reminiscent of Luke 17:20–21[88][89]—and the Gospel of John, with a terminology and approach that is suggestive of what was later termed Gnosticism, has recently been seen as a possible response to the Gospel of Thomas, a text that is commonly labelled proto-Gnostic. Scholarship, then, is currently exploring the relationship in the Early Church between mystical speculation and experience on the one hand and the search for church order on the other, by analyzing new-found texts, by subjecting canonical texts to further scrutiny, and by an examination of the passage of New Testament texts to canonical status.
Catholic interpretation
St. Peter's Basilica, Vatican City, the largest church in the world and a symbol of the Catholic Church
In antiquity, two schools of exegesis developed in Alexandria and Antioch. Alexandrine interpretation, exemplified by Origen, tended to read Scripture allegorically, while Antiochene interpretation adhered to the literal sense, holding that other meanings (called theoria) could only be accepted if based on the literal meaning.[90]
Catholic theology distinguishes two senses of scripture: the literal and the spiritual.[91]
The literal sense of understanding scripture is the meaning conveyed by the words of Scripture. The spiritual sense is further subdivided into:
The allegorical sense, which includes typology. An example would be the parting of the Red Sea being understood as a "type" (sign) of baptism.[1Cor 10:2]
The moral sense, which understands the scripture to contain some ethical teaching.
The anagogical sense, which applies to eschatology, eternity and the consummation of the world
Regarding exegesis, following the rules of sound interpretation, Catholic theology holds:
The injunction that all other senses of sacred scripture are based on the literal[92][93]
That the historicity of the Gospels must be absolutely and constantly held[94]
That scripture must be read within the "living Tradition of the whole Church"[95] and
That "the task of interpretation has been entrusted to the bishops in communion with the successor of Peter, the Bishop of Rome".[96]
Protestant interpretation
Protestants believe Martin Luther's basic beliefs against the Catholic Church: Sola scriptura (by Scripture alone), Sola fide (by faith alone), Sola gratia (by grace alone), Solus Christus (through Christ alone) and Soli Deo gloria (glory to God alone).
Clarity of Scripture
Protestant Christians believe that the Bible is a self-sufficient revelation, the final authority on all Christian doctrine, and revealed all truth necessary for salvation. This concept is known as sola scriptura.[97] Protestants characteristically believe that ordinary believers may reach an adequate understanding of Scripture because Scripture itself is clear (or "perspicuous"), because of the help of the Holy Spirit, or both. Martin Luther believed that without God's help Scripture would be "enveloped in darkness".[98] He advocated "one definite and simple understanding of Scripture".[98] John Calvin wrote, "all who refuse not to follow the Holy Spirit as their guide, find in the Scripture a clear light".[99] The Second Helvetic Confession, composed by the pastor of the Reformed church in Zürich (successor to Protestant reformer Zwingli) was adopted as a declaration of doctrine by most European Reformed churches.[100]
Original intended meaning of Scripture
Protestants stress the meaning conveyed by the words of Scripture, the historical-grammatical method.[101] The historical-grammatical method or grammatico-historical method is an effort in Biblical hermeneutics to find the intended original meaning in the text.[102] This original intended meaning of the text is drawn out through examination of the passage in light of the grammatical and syntactical aspects, the historical background, the literary genre as well as theological (canonical) considerations.[103] The historical-grammatical method distinguishes between the one original meaning and the significance of the text. The significance of the text includes the ensuing use of the text or application. The original passage is seen as having only a single meaning or sense. As Milton S. Terry said: "A fundamental principle in grammatico-historical exposition is that the words and sentences can have but one significance in one and the same connection. The moment we neglect this principle we drift out upon a sea of uncertainty and conjecture."[104] Technically speaking, the grammatical-historical method of interpretation is distinct from the determination of the passage's significance in light of that interpretation. Taken together, both define the term (Biblical) hermeneutics.[102]
Some Protestant interpreters make use of typology.[105]
Eschatology
The 7th-century Khor Virap monastery in the shadow of Mount Ararat. Armenia was the first state to adopt Christianity as the state religion, in AD 301.[106]
The end of things, whether the end of an individual life, the end of the age, or the end of the world, broadly speaking is Christian eschatology; the study of the destiny of humans as it is revealed in the Bible. The major issues in Christian eschatology are the Tribulation, death and the afterlife, the Rapture, the Second Coming of Jesus, Resurrection of the Dead, Heaven and Hell, Millennialism, the Last Judgment, the end of the world and the New Heavens and New Earth.
Christians believe that the second coming of Christ will occur at the end of time after a period of severe persecution (the Great Tribulation). All who have died will be resurrected bodily from the dead for the Last Judgment. Jesus will fully establish the Kingdom of God in fulfillment of scriptural prophecies.[107][108]
Death and afterlife
Most Christians believe that human beings experience divine judgment and are rewarded either with eternal life or eternal damnation. This includes the general judgement at the resurrection of the dead as well as the belief (held by Catholics,[109][110] Orthodox[111][112] and most Protestants) in a judgment particular to the individual soul upon physical death.
In Catholicism, those who die in a state of grace, i.e., without any mortal sin separating them from God, but are still imperfectly purified from the effects of sin, undergo purification through the intermediate state of purgatory to achieve the holiness necessary for entrance into God's presence.[113] Those who have attained this goal are called saints (Latin sanctus, "holy").[114]
Some Christian groups, such as Seventh-day Adventists, hold to mortalism, the belief that the human soul is not naturally immortal, and is unconscious during the intermediate state between bodily death and resurrection. These Christians also hold to Annihilationism, the belief that subsequent to the final judgement, the wicked will cease to exist rather than suffer everlasting torment. Jehovah's Witnesses hold to a similar view.[115]
Worship
Samples of Catholic religious objects—the Bible, a crucifix and a rosary
Justin Martyr described 2nd-century Christian liturgy in his First Apology (c. 150) to Emperor Antoninus Pius, and his description remains relevant to the basic structure of Christian liturgical worship:
And on the day called Sunday, all who live in cities or in the country gather together to one place, and the memoirs of the apostles or the writings of the prophets are read, as long as time permits; then, when the reader has ceased, the president verbally instructs, and exhorts to the imitation of these good things. Then we all rise together and pray, and, as we before said, when our prayer is ended, bread and wine and water are brought, and the president in like manner offers prayers and thanksgivings, according to his ability, and the people assent, saying Amen; and there is a distribution to each, and a participation of that over which thanks have been given, and to those who are absent a portion is sent by the deacons. And they who are well to do, and willing, give what each thinks fit; and what is collected is deposited with the president, who succours the orphans and widows and those who, through sickness or any other cause, are in want, and those who are in bonds and the strangers sojourning among us, and in a word takes care of all who are in need.[116]
Thus, as Justin described, Christians assemble for communal worship on Sunday, the day of the resurrection, though other liturgical practices often occur outside this setting. Scripture readings are drawn from the Old and New Testaments, but especially the gospel accounts. Often these are arranged on an annual cycle, using a book called a lectionary. Instruction is given based on these readings, called a sermon, or homily. There are a variety of congregational prayers, including thanksgiving, confession and intercession, which occur throughout the service and take a variety of forms including recited, responsive, silent, or sung. The Lord's Prayer, or Our Father, is regularly prayed.
A modern Protestant worship band leading a contemporary worship session
Some groups depart from this traditional liturgical structure. A division is often made between "High" church services, characterized by greater solemnity and ritual, and "Low" services, but even within these two categories there is great diversity in forms of worship. Seventh-day Adventists meet on Saturday, while others do not meet on a weekly basis. Charismatic or Pentecostal congregations may spontaneously feel led by the Holy Spirit to action rather than follow a formal order of service, including spontaneous prayer. Quakers sit quietly until moved by the Holy Spirit to speak.
Some evangelical services resemble concerts with rock and pop music, dancing and use of multimedia. For groups which do not recognize a priesthood distinct from ordinary believers the services are generally led by a minister, preacher, or pastor. Still others may lack any formal leaders, either in principle or by local necessity. Some churches use only a cappella music, either on principle (for example, many Churches of Christ object to the use of instruments in worship) or by tradition (as in Orthodoxy).
Nearly all forms of churchmanship celebrate the Eucharist (Holy Communion), which consists of a consecrated meal. It is reenacted in accordance with Jesus' instruction at the Last Supper that his followers do in remembrance of him as when he gave his disciples bread, saying, "This is my body", and gave them wine saying, "This is my blood".[117] Some Christian denominations practice closed communion. They offer communion to those who are already united in that denomination or sometimes individual church. Catholics restrict participation to their members who are not in a state of mortal sin. Most other churches practice open communion since they view communion as a means to unity, rather than an end, and invite all believing Christians to participate.
Worship can be varied for special events like baptisms or weddings in the service or significant feast days. In the early church, Christians and those yet to complete initiation would separate for the Eucharistic part of the worship. In many churches today, adults and children will separate for all or some of the service to receive age-appropriate teaching. Such children's worship is often called Sunday school or Sabbath school (Sunday schools are often held before rather than during services).
Sacraments
2nd-century description of the Eucharist
And this food is called among us Eukaristia [the Eucharist], of which no one is allowed to partake but the man who believes that the things which we teach are true, and who has been washed with the washing that is for the remission of sins, and unto regeneration, and who is so living as Christ has enjoined. For not as common bread and common drink do we receive these; but in like manner as Jesus Christ our Savior, having been made flesh by the Word of God, had both flesh and blood for our salvation, so likewise have we been taught that the food which is blessed by the prayer of His word, and from which our blood and flesh by transmutation are nourished, is the flesh and blood of that Jesus who was made flesh.
Justin Martyr[116]
In Christian belief and practice, a sacrament is a rite, instituted by Christ, that confers grace, constituting a sacred mystery. The term is derived from the Latin word sacramentum, which was used to translate the Greek word for mystery. Views concerning both which rites are sacramental, and what it means for an act to be a sacrament, vary among Christian denominations and traditions.[118]
The most conventional functional definition of a sacrament is that it is an outward sign, instituted by Christ, that conveys an inward, spiritual grace through Christ. The two most widely accepted sacraments are Baptism and the Eucharist (or Holy Communion), however, the majority of Christians also recognize five additional sacraments: Confirmation (Chrismation in the Orthodox tradition), Holy orders (ordination), Penance (or Confession), Anointing of the Sick and Matrimony (see Christian views on marriage).[118]
Taken together, these are the Seven Sacraments as recognized by churches in the High Church tradition—notably Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, Independent Catholic, Old Catholic, many Anglicans and some Lutherans. Most other denominations and traditions typically affirm only Baptism and Eucharist as sacraments, while some Protestant groups, such as the Quakers, reject sacramental theology.[118] Christian denominations, such as Baptists, which believe these rites do not communicate grace, prefer to call Baptism and Holy Communion ordinances rather than sacraments.
In addition to this, the Church of the East has two additional sacraments in place of the traditional sacraments of Matrimony and the Anointing of the Sick. These include Holy Leaven (Melka) and the sign of the cross.[119]
Baptism, specifically infant baptism, in the Lutheran tradition
A penitent confessing his sins in a Ukrainian Catholic church
A Methodist minister celebrating the Eucharist
Confirmation being administered in an Anglican church
Ordination of a priest in the Eastern Orthodox tradition
Crowning during Holy Matrimony in the Syro-Malabar Catholic Church
Service of the Sacrament of Holy Unction served on Great and Holy Wednesday
Liturgical calendar
A depiction of the Nativity with a Christmas tree backdrop
Catholics, Anglicans, Eastern Christians and traditional Protestant communities frame worship around the liturgical year. The liturgical cycle divides the year into a series of seasons, each with their theological emphases, and modes of prayer, which can be signified by different ways of decorating churches, colours of paraments and vestments for clergy,[120] scriptural readings, themes for preaching and even different traditions and practices often observed personally or in the home.
Western Christian liturgical calendars are based on the cycle of the Roman Rite of the Catholic Church,[120] and Eastern Christians use analogous calendars based on the cycle of their respective rites. Calendars set aside holy days, such as solemnities which commemorate an event in the life of Jesus, Mary or the saints, and periods of fasting, such as Lent and other pious events such as memoria or lesser festivals commemorating saints. Christian groups that do not follow a liturgical tradition often retain certain celebrations, such as Christmas, Easter and Pentecost: these are the celebrations of Christ's birth, resurrection and the descent of the Holy Spirit upon the Church, respectively. A few denominations make no use of a liturgical calendar.[121]
Symbols
The cross and the fish are two common symbols of Jesus Christ. The letters of the Greek word ΙΧΘΥΣ Ichthys (fish) form an acronym for "Ίησοῦς Χριστός, Θεοῦ Υἱός, Σωτήρ", which translates into English as "Jesus Christ, God's Son, Savior".
Christianity has not generally practiced aniconism, or the avoidance or prohibition of types of images, even if the early Jewish Christians sects, as well as some modern denominations, preferred to some extent not to use figures in their symbols, by invoking the Decalogue's prohibition of idolatry.
The cross, which is today one of the most widely recognized symbols in the world, was used as a Christian symbol from the earliest times.[122][123] Tertullian, in his book De Corona, tells how it was already a tradition for Christians to trace repeatedly on their foreheads the sign of the cross.[124] Although the cross was known to the early Christians, the crucifix did not appear in use until the 5th century.[125]
Among the symbols employed by the primitive Christians, that of the fish or Ichthys seems to have ranked first in importance. From monumental sources such as tombs it is known that the symbolic fish was familiar to Christians from the earliest times. The fish was depicted as a Christian symbol in the first decades of the 2nd century.[126] Its popularity among Christians was due principally, it would seem, to the famous acrostic consisting of the initial letters of five Greek words forming the word for fish (Ichthys), which words briefly but clearly described the character of Christ and the claim to worship of believers: Iesous Christos Theou Yios Soter (Ίησοῦς Χριστός, Θεοῦ Υἱός, Σωτήρ), meaning, Jesus Christ, Son of God, Savior.[126]
Other major Christian symbols include the chi-rho monogram, the dove (symbolic of the Holy Spirit), the sacrificial lamb (symbolic of Christ's sacrifice), the vine (symbolizing the necessary connectedness of the Christian with Christ) and many others. These all derive from writings found in the New Testament.[125]
Baptism
The baptism of Jesus depicted by Almeida Júnior
Baptism is the ritual act, with the use of water, by which a person is admitted to membership of the Church. Beliefs on baptism vary among denominations. Differences occur firstly on whether the act has any spiritual significance. Some, such as the Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches, as well as Lutherans and Anglicans, hold to the doctrine of baptismal regeneration, which affirms that baptism creates or strengthens a person's faith, and is intimately linked to salvation. Others view baptism as a purely symbolic act, an external public declaration of the inward change which has taken place in the person, but not as spiritually efficacious. Secondly, there are differences of opinion on the methodology of the act. These methods are: by immersion; if immersion is total, by submersion; by affusion (pouring); and by aspersion (sprinkling). Those who hold the first view may also adhere to the tradition of infant baptism;[127] the Orthodox Churches all practice infant baptism and always baptize by total immersion repeated three times in the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit.[128][129] The Catholic Church also practices infant baptism,[130] usually by affusion, and utilizing the Trinitarian formula.[131]
Prayer
Jesus' teaching on prayer in the Sermon on the Mount displays a distinct lack of interest in the external aspects of prayer. A concern with the techniques of prayer is condemned as 'pagan', and instead a simple trust in God's fatherly goodness is encouraged.[Mat. 6:5–15] Elsewhere in the New Testament this same freedom of access to God is also emphasized.[Phil. 4:6][Jam. 5:13–19] This confident position should be understood in light of Christian belief in the unique relationship between the believer and Christ through the indwelling of the Holy Spirit.[132]
In subsequent Christian traditions, certain physical gestures are emphasized, including medieval gestures such as genuflection or making the sign of the cross. Kneeling, bowing and prostrations (see also poklon) are often practiced in more traditional branches of Christianity. Frequently in Western Christianity the hands are placed palms together and forward as in the feudal commendation ceremony. At other times the older orans posture may be used, with palms up and elbows in.
Intercessory prayer is prayer offered for the benefit of other people. There are many intercessory prayers recorded in the Bible, including prayers of the Apostle Peter on behalf of sick persons[Acts 9:40] and by prophets of the Old Testament in favor of other people.[1Ki 17:19–22] In the Epistle of James, no distinction is made between the intercessory prayer offered by ordinary believers and the prominent Old Testament prophet Elijah.[Jam 5:16–18] The effectiveness of prayer in Christianity derives from the power of God rather than the status of the one praying.[132]
The ancient church, in both Eastern Christianity and Western Christianity, developed a tradition of asking for the intercession of (deceased) saints, and this remains the practice of most Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, Catholic, and some Anglican churches. Churches of the Protestant Reformation, however, rejected prayer to the saints, largely on the basis of the sole mediatorship of Christ.[133] The reformer Huldrych Zwingli admitted that he had offered prayers to the saints until his reading of the Bible convinced him that this was idolatrous.[134]
According to the Catechism of the Catholic Church: "Prayer is the raising of one's mind and heart to God or the requesting of good things from God."[135] The Book of Common Prayer in the Anglican tradition is a guide which provides a set order for church services, containing set prayers, scripture readings, and hymns or sung Psalms.
History
Early Church and Christological Councils
Chapel of Saint Ananias, Damascus, Syria, an early example of a Christian house of worship; built in the 1st century AD
An early circular ichthys symbol, created by combining the Greek letters ΙΧΘΥΣ into a wheel. Ephesus, Asia Minor.
Kadisha Valley, Lebanon, home to some of the earliest Christian monasteries in the world
Christianity began as a Jewish sect in the Levant of the middle east in the mid-1st century. Other than Second Temple Judaism, the primary religious influences of early Christianity are Zoroastrianism and Gnosticism.[note 2][16][17][136] John Bowker states that Christian ideas such as "angels, the end of the world, a final judgment, the resurrection and heaven and hell received form and substance from ... Zoroastrian beliefs".[137] Its earliest development took place under the leadership of the remaining Twelve Apostles, particularly Saint Peter, and Paul the Apostle, followed by the early bishops, whom Christians consider the successors of the Apostles.
According to the Christian scriptures, Christians were from the beginning subject to persecution by some Jewish and Roman religious authorities, who disagreed with the apostles' teachings (See Split of early Christianity and Judaism). This involved punishments, including death, for Christians such as Stephen[Acts 7:59] and James, son of Zebedee.[Acts 12:2] Larger-scale persecutions followed at the hands of the authorities of the Roman Empire, first in the year 64, when Emperor Nero blamed them for the Great Fire of Rome. According to Church tradition, it was under Nero's persecution that early Church leaders Peter and Paul of Tarsus were each martyred in Rome.
Further widespread persecutions of the Church occurred under nine subsequent Roman emperors, most intensely under Decius and Diocletian. From the year 150, Christian teachers began to produce theological and apologetic works aimed at defending the faith. These authors are known as the Church Fathers, and study of them is called Patristics. Notable early Fathers include Ignatius of Antioch, Polycarp, Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Clement of Alexandria and Origen. However, Armenia is considered the first nation to accept Christianity in AD 301.[106][138][139]
King Trdat IV made Christianity the state religion in Armenia between 301 and 314, it was not an entirely new religion in Armenia. It penetrated into the country from at least the third century, but may have been present even earlier.[140]
End of Roman persecution under Emperor Constantine (AD 313)
An example of Byzantine pictorial art, the Deësis mosaic at the Hagia Sophia in Constantinople
State persecution ceased in the 4th century, when Constantine I issued an edict of toleration in 313. On 27 February 380, Emperor Theodosius I enacted a law establishing Nicene Christianity as the state church of the Roman Empire.[141] From at least the 4th century, Christianity has played a prominent role in the shaping of Western civilization.[142]
Constantine was also instrumental in the convocation of the First Council of Nicaea in 325, which sought to address the Arian heresy and formulated the Nicene Creed, which is still used by the Catholic Church, Eastern Orthodoxy, Anglican Communion and many Protestant churches.[40] Nicaea was the first of a series of Ecumenical (worldwide) Councils which formally defined critical elements of the theology of the Church, notably concerning Christology.[143] The Assyrian Church of the East did not accept the third and following Ecumenical Councils, and are still separate today.
The presence of Christianity in Africa began in the middle of the 1st century in Egypt, and by the end of the 2nd century in the region around Carthage. Mark the Evangelist started the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria in about AD 43.[144][145][146] Important Africans who influenced the early development of Christianity includes Tertullian, Clement of Alexandria, Origen of Alexandria, Cyprian, Athanasius and Augustine of Hippo. The later rise of Islam in North Africa reduced the size and numbers of Christian congregations, leaving only the Coptic Church in Egypt, the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church in the Horn of Africa and the Nubian Church in the Sudan (Nobatia, Makuria and Alodia).
In terms of prosperity and cultural life, the Byzantine Empire was one of the peaks in Christian history and Christian civilization,[147] and Constantinople remained the leading city of the Christian world in size, wealth and culture.[148] There was a renewed interest in classical Greek philosophy, as well as an increase in literary output in vernacular Greek.[149] Byzantine art and literature held a pre-eminent place in Europe, and the cultural impact of Byzantine art on the west during this period was enormous and of long lasting significance.[150]
Early Middle Ages
With the decline and fall of the Roman Empire in the west, the papacy became a political player, first visible in Pope Leo's diplomatic dealings with Huns and Vandals.[151] The church also entered into a long period of missionary activity and expansion among the various tribes. While Arianists instituted the death penalty for practicing pagans (see Massacre of Verden as example), Catholicism also spread among the Germanic peoples,[151] the Celtic and Slavic peoples, the Hungarians and the Baltic peoples. Christianity has been an important part of the shaping of Western civilization, at least since the 4th century.[9][10][142]
Around 500, St. Benedict set out his Monastic Rule, establishing a system of regulations for the foundation and running of monasteries.[151] Monasticism became a powerful force throughout Europe,[151] and gave rise to many early centers of learning, most famously in Ireland, Scotland and Gaul, contributing to the Carolingian Renaissance of the 9th century.
In the 7th century Muslims conquered Syria (including Jerusalem), North Africa and Spain. Part of the Muslims' success was due to the exhaustion of the Byzantine empire in its decades long conflict with Persia.[152] Beginning in the 8th century, with the rise of Carolingian leaders, the papacy began to find greater political support in the Frankish Kingdom.[153]
The Middle Ages brought about major changes within the church. Pope Gregory the Great dramatically reformed ecclesiastical structure and administration.[154] In the early 8th century, iconoclasm became a divisive issue, when it was sponsored by the Byzantine emperors. The Second Ecumenical Council of Nicaea (787) finally pronounced in favor of icons.[155] In the early 10th century, Western Christian monasticism was further rejuvenated through the leadership of the great Benedictine monastery of Cluny.[156]
Hebraism, like Hellenism, has been an all-important factor in the development of Western Civilization; Judaism, as the precursor of Christianity, has indirectly had much to do with shaping the ideals and morality of western nations since the Christian era.[10]
High and Late Middle Ages
Pope Urban II at the Council of Clermont, where he preached the First Crusade
In the west, from the 11th century onward, older cathedral schools developed into universities (see University of Oxford, University of Paris and University of Bologna.) The traditional medieval universities—evolved from Catholic and Protestant church schools—then established specialized academic structures for properly educating greater numbers of students as professionals. Prof. Walter Rüegg, editor of A History of the University in Europe, reports that universities then only trained students to become clerics, lawyers, civil servants and physicians.[157]
Originally teaching only theology, universities steadily added subjects including medicine, philosophy and law, becoming the direct ancestors of modern institutions of learning.[158] The university is generally regarded as an institution that has its origin in the Medieval Christian setting.[159][160] Prior to the establishment of universities, European higher education took place for hundreds of years in Christian cathedral schools or monastic schools (Scholae monasticae), in which monks and nuns taught classes; evidence of these immediate forerunners of the later university at many places dates back to the 6th century AD.[161]
Accompanying the rise of the "new towns" throughout Europe, mendicant orders were founded, bringing the consecrated religious life out of the monastery and into the new urban setting. The two principal mendicant movements were the Franciscans[162] and the Dominicans[163] founded by St. Francis and St. Dominic respectively. Both orders made significant contributions to the development of the great universities of Europe. Another new order were the Cistercians, whose large isolated monasteries spearheaded the settlement of former wilderness areas. In this period church building and ecclesiastical architecture reached new heights, culminating in the orders of Romanesque and Gothic architecture and the building of the great European cathedrals.[164]
From 1095 under the pontificate of Urban II, the Crusades were launched.[165] These were a series of military campaigns in the Holy Land and elsewhere, initiated in response to pleas from the Byzantine Emperor Alexios I for aid against Turkish expansion. The Crusades ultimately failed to stifle Islamic aggression and even contributed to Christian enmity with the sacking of Constantinople during the Fourth Crusade.[166]
Over a period stretching from the 7th to the 13th century, the Christian Church underwent gradual alienation, resulting in a schism dividing it into a so-called Latin or Western Christian branch, the Catholic Church,[167] and an Eastern, largely Greek, branch, the Orthodox Church. These two churches disagree on a number of administrative, liturgical and doctrinal issues, most notably papal primacy of jurisdiction.[168][169] The Second Council of Lyon (1274) and the Council of Florence (1439) attempted to reunite the churches, but in both cases the Eastern Orthodox refused to implement the decisions and the two principal churches remain in schism to the present day. However, the Catholic Church has achieved union with various smaller eastern churches.
Beginning around 1184, following the crusade against the Cathar heresy,[170] various institutions, broadly referred to as the Inquisition, were established with the aim of suppressing heresy and securing religious and doctrinal unity within Christianity through conversion and prosecution.[171]
Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation
Martin Luther started the Protestant Reformation in 1517 with the Ninety-Five Theses, going against the Catholic interpretation of the Bible.
15th-century Renaissance brought about a renewed interest in ancient and classical learning. Another major schism, the Reformation, resulted in the splintering of the Western Christendom into several branches.[172] Martin Luther in 1517 protested against the sale of indulgences and soon moved on to deny several key points of Catholic doctrine.[173]
Other reformers like Zwingli, Oecolampadius, Calvin, Knox and Arminius further criticized Catholic teaching and worship. These challenges developed into the movement called Protestantism, which repudiated the primacy of the pope, the role of tradition, the seven sacraments and other doctrines and practices.[173] The Reformation in England began in 1534, when King Henry VIII had himself declared head of the Church of England. Beginning in 1536, the monasteries throughout England, Wales and Ireland were dissolved.[174]
Thomas Müntzer, Andreas Karlstadt and other theologians perceived both the Catholic Church and the confessions of the Magisterial Reformation as corrupted. Their activity brought about the Radical Reformation, which gave birth to various Anabaptist denominations.
Michelangelo's Pietà in St. Peter's Basilica, The Catholic Church was among the patronages of the Renaissance.[175][176][177]
Partly in response to the Protestant Reformation, the Catholic Church engaged in a substantial process of reform and renewal, known as the Counter-Reformation or Catholic Reform.[178] The Council of Trent clarified and reasserted Catholic doctrine. During the following centuries, competition between Catholicism and Protestantism became deeply entangled with political struggles among European states.[179]
Meanwhile, the discovery of America by Christopher Columbus in 1492 brought about a new wave of missionary activity. Partly from missionary zeal, but under the impetus of colonial expansion by the European powers, Christianity spread to the Americas, Oceania, East Asia and sub-Saharan Africa.
Throughout Europe, the divides caused by the Reformation led to outbreaks of religious violence and the establishment of separate state churches in Europe. Lutheranism spread into northern, central and eastern parts of present-day Germany, Livonia and Scandinavia. Anglicanism was established in England in 1534. Calvinism and its varieties (such as Presbyterianism) were introduced in Scotland, the Netherlands, Hungary, Switzerland and France. Arminianism gained followers in the Netherlands and Frisia. Ultimately, these differences led to the outbreak of conflicts in which religion played a key factor. The Thirty Years' War, the English Civil War and the French Wars of Religion are prominent examples. These events intensified the Christian debate on persecution and toleration.[180]
Post-Enlightenment
A depiction of Madonna and Child in a 19th-century Kakure Kirishitan Japanese woodcut
In the era known as the Great Divergence, when in the West the Age of Enlightenment and the Scientific revolution brought about great societal changes, Christianity was confronted with various forms of skepticism and with certain modern political ideologies such as versions of socialism and liberalism.[181] Events ranged from mere anti-clericalism to violent outbursts against Christianity such as the Dechristianisation during the French Revolution,[182] the Spanish Civil War and certain Marxist movements, especially the Russian Revolution and the persecution of Christians in the Soviet Union under state atheism.[183][184][185][186]
Especially pressing in Europe was the formation of nation states after the Napoleonic era. In all European countries, different Christian denominations found themselves in competition, to greater or lesser extents, with each other and with the state. Variables are the relative sizes of the denominations and the religious, political and ideological orientation of the state. Urs Altermatt of the University of Fribourg, looking specifically at Catholicisms in Europe, identifies four models for the European nations. In traditionally Catholic countries such as Belgium, Spain and to some extent Austria, religious and national communities are more or less identical. Cultural symbiosis and separation are found in Poland, Ireland and Switzerland, all countries with competing denominations. Competition is found in Germany, the Netherlands and again Switzerland, all countries with minority Catholic populations who to a greater or lesser extent did identify with the nation. Finally, separation between religion (again, specifically Catholicism) and the state is found to a great degree in France and Italy, countries where the state actively opposed itself to the authority of the Catholic Church.[187]
The combined factors of the formation of nation states and ultramontanism, especially in Germany and the Netherlands but also in England (to a much lesser extent[188]), often forced Catholic churches, organizations and believers to choose between the national demands of the state and the authority of the Church, specifically the papacy. This conflict came to a head in the First Vatican Council, and in Germany would lead directly to the Kulturkampf, where liberals and Protestants under the leadership of Bismarck managed to severely restrict Catholic expression and organization.
Christian commitment in Europe dropped as modernity and secularism came into their own in Europe,[189] particularly in the Czech Republic and Estonia,[190] while religious commitments in America have been generally high in comparison to Europe. The late 20th century has shown the shift of Christian adherence to the Third World and southern hemisphere in general, with the western civilization no longer the chief standard bearer of Christianity.
Some Europeans (including diaspora), Indigenous peoples of the Americas and natives of other continents have revived their respective peoples' historical folk religions. Approximately 7.1 to 10% of Arabs are Christians,[191] most prevalent in Egypt, Syria and Lebanon.
Demographics
With around 2.4 billion adherents,[4][5] split into three main branches of Catholic, Protestant and Eastern Orthodox, Christianity is the world's largest religion.[3] The Christian share of the world's population has stood at around 33% for the last hundred years, which says that one in three persons on earth are Christians. This masks a major shift in the demographics of Christianity; large increases in the developing world have been accompanied by substantial declines in the developed world, mainly in Europe and North America.[192] According to a 2015 Pew Research Center study, within the next four decades, Christians will remain the world's largest religion; and by 2050, the Christian population is expected to exceed 3 billion.[193]:60
As a percentage of Christians, the Catholic Church and Orthodoxy (both Eastern and Oriental) are declining, while Protestants and other Christians are on the rise.[194][195][196] The so-called popular Protestantism[note 4] is one of the fastest growing religious categories in the world.[197][198]
Christianity is the predominant religion in Europe, the Americas and Southern Africa. In Asia, it is the dominant religion in Georgia, Armenia, East Timor and the Philippines.[199] However, it is declining in many areas including the Northern and Western United States,[200] Oceania (Australia and New Zealand), northern Europe (including Great Britain,[201] Scandinavia and other places), France, Germany, the Canadian provinces of Ontario, British Columbia and Quebec, and parts of Asia (especially the Middle East – due to the Christian emigration,[202][203][204] South Korea,[205] Taiwan,[206] and Macau[207]).
The Christian population is not decreasing in Brazil, the Southern United States[208] and the province of Alberta, Canada,[209] but the percentage is decreasing. In countries such as Australia[210] and New Zealand,[211] the Christian population are declining in both numbers and percentage.
Despite the declining numbers, Christianity remains the dominant religion in the Western World, where 70% are Christians.[6] A 2011 Pew Research Center survey found that 76.2% of Europeans, 73.3% in Oceania and about 86.0% in the Americas (90.0% in Latin America and 77.4% in North America) identified themselves as Christians.[6][212][213][214] By 2010 about 157 countries and territories in the world had Christian majorities.[3]
However, there are many charismatic movements that have become well established over large parts of the world, especially Africa, Latin America and Asia.[215][216][217][218][219] Since 1900, primarily due to conversion, Protestantism has spread rapidly in Africa, Asia, Oceania and Latin America.[220] From 1960 to 2000, the global growth of the number of reported Evangelical Protestants grew three times the world's population rate, and twice that of Islam.[221] St. Mary's University study estimated about 10.2 million Muslim convert to Christianity in 2015.[222] as well a significant numbers of Muslims converts to Christianity in Afghanistan,[223] Albania,[222] Azerbaijan[224][225] Algeria,[226][227] Belgium,[228] France,[227] Germany,[229] Iran,[230] India,[227] Indonesia,[231] Malaysia,[232] Morocco,[227][233] Russia,[227] Netherlands,[234] Saudi Arabia,[235] Tunisia,[222] Turkey,[227][236][237][238] Kazakhstan,[239] Kyrgyzstan,[222] Kosovo,[240] United States,[241] and Central Asia.[242][243] It is also reported that Christianity is popular among people of different backgrounds in India (mostly Hindus),[244][245] and Malaysia,[246] Mongolia,[247] Nigeria,[248] Vietnam,[249] Singapore,[250] Indonesia,[251][252] China,[253] Japan,[254] and South Korea.[255]
In most countries in the developed world, church attendance among people who continue to identify themselves as Christians has been falling over the last few decades.[256] Some sources view this simply as part of a drift away from traditional membership institutions,[257] while others link it to signs of a decline in belief in the importance of religion in general.[258] Europe's Christian population, though in decline, still constitutes the largest geographical component of the religion.[259] According to data from the 2012 European Social Survey, around a third of European Christians say they attend services once a month or more,[260] Conversely about more than two-thirds of Latin American Christians and according to the World Values Survey about 90% of African Christians (in Ghana, Nigeria, Rwanda, South Africa and Zimbabwe) said they attended church regularly.[260]
Christianity, in one form or another, is the sole state religion of the following nations: Argentina (Catholic),[261] Tuvalu (Reformed), Tonga (Methodist), Norway (Lutheran),[262][263][264] Costa Rica (Catholic),[265] Kingdom of Denmark (Lutheran),[266] England (Anglican),[267] Georgia (Georgian Orthodox),[268] Greece (Greek Orthodox),[269] Iceland (Lutheran),[270] Liechtenstein (Catholic),[271] Malta (Catholic),[272] Monaco (Catholic),[273] and Vatican City (Catholic).[274]
There are numerous other countries, such as Cyprus, which although do not have an established church, still give official recognition and support to a specific Christian denomination.[275]
Demographics of major traditions within Christianity (Pew Research Center, 2010 data)[276]
Tradition	Followers	% of the Christian population	% of the world population	Follower dynamics	Dynamics in- and outside Christianity
Catholic Church	1,094,610,000	50.1	15.9	Increase Growing	Decrease Declining
Protestantism	800,640,000	36.7	11.6	Increase Growing	Increase Growing
Orthodoxy	260,380,000	11.9	3.8	Decrease Declining	Decrease Declining
Other Christianity	28,430,000	1.3	0.4	Increase Growing	Increase Growing
Christianity	2,184,060,000	100	31.7	Increase Growing	Steady Stable
The global distribution of Christians: Countries colored a darker shade have a higher proportion of Christians.[277]
Countries with 50% or more Christians are colored purple while countries with 10% to 50% Christians are colored pink
Nations with Christianity as their state religion are in blue
Nations with Christianity as their state religion (detailed map; see legend for more)
Distribution of Catholics
Distribution of Protestants
Distribution of Eastern Orthodox
Distribution of Oriental Orthodox
Other Christians by number: black - more than 10 million; red - more than 1 million
Major divisions
The three primary divisions of Christianity are Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy and Protestantism.[31]:14[278] However, there are other present[279] and historical[280] Christian groups that do not fit neatly into one of these primary categories. The Nicene Creed is accepted as authoritative by most Christians, including the Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Anglican and major Protestant churches.[281]
There is a diversity of doctrines and practices among groups calling themselves Christian. These groups are sometimes classified under denominations, though for theological reasons many groups reject this classification system.[282] A broader distinction that is sometimes drawn is between Eastern Christianity and Western Christianity, which has its origins in the East–West Schism (Great Schism) of the 11th century.
In addition to the Lutheran and Reformed (or Calvinist) branches of the Reformation, there is Anglicanism after the English Reformation. The Anabaptist tradition was largely ostracized by the other Protestant parties at the time, but has achieved a measure of affirmation in more recent history. Adventist, Baptist, Methodist, Pentecostal and other Protestant confessions arose in the following centuries.
Catholic Church
Pope Francis, the current leader of the Catholic Church
The Catholic Church consists of those particular Churches, headed by bishops, in communion with the Pope, the Bishop of Rome, as its highest authority in matters of faith, morality and Church governance.[283][284] Like Eastern Orthodoxy, the Catholic Church, through apostolic succession, traces its origins to the Christian community founded by Jesus Christ.[285][286] Catholics maintain that the "one, holy, catholic and apostolic church" founded by Jesus subsists fully in the Catholic Church, but also acknowledges other Christian churches and communities[287][288] and works towards reconciliation among all Christians.[287] The Catholic faith is detailed in the Catechism of the Catholic Church.[289][290]
The 2,834 sees[291] are grouped into 24 particular autonomous Churches (the largest of which being the Latin Church), each with its own distinct traditions regarding the liturgy and the administering the sacraments.[292] With more than 1.1 billion baptized members, the Catholic Church is the largest Christian church and represents over half of all Christians as well as one sixth of the world's population.[293][294][295]
Eastern Orthodox Church
The Cathedral of Christ the Saviour in Moscow is the tallest Eastern Orthodox Christian church in the world.
The Eastern Orthodox Church consists of those churches in communion with the Patriarchal Sees of the East, such as the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople.[296] Like the Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox Church also traces its heritage to the foundation of Christianity through apostolic succession and has an episcopal structure, though the autonomy of its component parts is emphasized, and most of them are national churches. A number of conflicts with Western Christianity over questions of doctrine and authority culminated in the Great Schism. Eastern Orthodoxy is the second largest single denomination in Christianity, with an estimated 225–300 million adherents.[6][294][297]
Oriental Orthodoxy
The Oriental Orthodox churches (also called "Old Oriental" churches) are those eastern churches that recognize the first three ecumenical councils—Nicaea, Constantinople and Ephesus—but reject the dogmatic definitions of the Council of Chalcedon and instead espouse a Miaphysite christology. The Oriental Orthodox communion consists of six groups: Syriac Orthodox, Coptic Orthodox, Ethiopian Orthodox, Eritrean Orthodox, Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church (India) and Armenian Apostolic churches.[298] These six churches, while being in communion with each other are completely independent hierarchically.[299] These churches are generally not in communion with Eastern Orthodox Churches with whom they are in dialogue for erecting a communion.[300]
Assyrian Church of the East
The Assyrian Church of the East, with an unbroken patriarchate established in the 17th century, is an independent Eastern Christian denomination which claims continuity from the Church of the East – in parallel to the Catholic patriarchate established in the 16th century that evolved into the Chaldean Catholic Church, an Eastern Catholic church in full communion with the Pope.
Protestantism
In the 16th century, Martin Luther, and subsequently Huldrych Zwingli and John Calvin, inaugurated what has come to be called Protestantism. Luther's primary theological heirs are known as Lutherans. Zwingli and Calvin's heirs are far broader denominationally, and are broadly referred to as the Reformed tradition.[301] The oldest Protestant groups separated from the Catholic Church in the Protestant Reformation, often followed by further divisions.[301]
In the 18th century, for example, Methodism grew out of Anglican minister John Wesley's evangelical and revival movement.[302] Several Pentecostal and non-denominational churches, which emphasize the cleansing power of the Holy Spirit, in turn grew out of Methodism.[303] Because Methodists, Pentecostals and other evangelicals stress "accepting Jesus as your personal Lord and Savior",[304] which comes from Wesley's emphasis of the New Birth,[305] they often refer to themselves as being born-again.[306][307]
Estimates of the total number of Protestants are very uncertain, but it seems clear that Protestantism is the second largest major group of Christians after Catholicism in number of followers (although the Eastern Orthodox Church is larger than any single Protestant denomination).[294] Often that number is put at more than 800 million, corresponding to nearly 40% of world's Christians.[194] The majority of Protestants are members of just a handful of denominational families, i.e. Adventists, Anglicans, Baptists, Reformed (Calvinists),[308] Lutherans, Methodists and Pentecostals.[194] Nondenominational, evangelical, charismatic, neo-charismatic, independent and other churches are on the rise, and constitute a significant part of Protestant Christianity.[309]
A special grouping are the Anglican churches descended from the Church of England and organized in the Anglican Communion. Some Anglican churches consider themselves both Protestant and Catholic.[310] Some Anglicans consider their church a branch of the "One Holy Catholic Church" alongside of the Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches, a concept rejected by the Catholic Church, some Eastern Orthodox, and many evangelical Anglicans themselves.[311][312]
While the Anglican, Lutheran and the Reformed branches of Protestantism originated in the Magisterial Reformation, other groups such as the Anabaptists, who often do not consider themselves to be Protestant, originated in the Radical Reformation, and are distinguished by their rejection of infant baptism; they believe in baptism only of adult believers — credobaptism (Anabaptists include the Amish, Apostolic, Bruderhof, Mennonites, Hutterites and Schwarzenau Brethren/German Baptist groups.)[313][314][315]
Some groups of individuals who hold basic Protestant tenets identify themselves simply as "Christians" or "born-again Christians". They typically distance themselves from the confessionalism and/or creedalism of other Christian communities[316] by calling themselves "non-denominational" or "evangelical". Often founded by individual pastors, they have little affiliation with historic denominations.[317]
Historical chart of the main Protestant branches
Restorationism
A 19th-century drawing of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery receiving the Aaronic priesthood from John the Baptist. Latter Day Saints believe that the Priesthood ceased to exist after the death of the Apostles and therefore needed to be restored.
The Second Great Awakening, a period of religious revival that occurred in the United States during the early 1800s, saw the development of a number of unrelated churches. They generally saw themselves as restoring the original church of Jesus Christ rather than reforming one of the existing churches.[318] A common belief held by Restorationists was that the other divisions of Christianity had introduced doctrinal defects into Christianity, which was known as the Great Apostasy.[319] In Asia, Iglesia ni Cristo is a known restorationist religion that was established during the early 1900s.
Some of the churches originating during this period are historically connected to early 19th-century camp meetings in the Midwest and Upstate New York. One of the largest churches produced from the movement is The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints[320]. American Millennialism and Adventism, which arose from Evangelical Protestantism, influenced the Jehovah's Witnesses movement and, as a reaction specifically to William Miller, the Seventh-day Adventists. Others, including the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), Evangelical Christian Church in Canada,[321][322] Churches of Christ, and the Christian churches and churches of Christ, have their roots in the contemporaneous Stone-Campbell Restoration Movement, which was centered in Kentucky and Tennessee. Other groups originating in this time period include the Christadelphians and the previously mentioned Latter Day Saint movement. While the churches originating in the Second Great Awakening have some superficial similarities, their doctrine and practices vary significantly.
Other
Various smaller Independent Catholic communities, such as the Old Catholic Church, include the word Catholic in their title, and arguably have more or less liturgical practices in common with the Catholic Church, but are no longer in full communion with the Holy See.
Spiritual Christians, such as the Doukhobor and Molokan, broke from the Russian Orthodox Church and maintain close association with Mennonites and Quakers due to similar religious practices; all of these groups are furthermore collectively considered to be peace churches due to their belief in pacifism.[323][324]
Messianic Judaism (or Messianic Movement) is the name of a Christian movement comprising a number of streams, whose members may consider themselves Jewish. The movement originated in the 1960s and 1970s, and it blends elements of religious Jewish practice with evangelical Christianity. Messianic Judaism affirms Christian creeds such as the messiahship and divinity of "Yeshua" (the Hebrew name of Jesus) and the Triune Nature of God, while also adhering to some Jewish dietary laws and customs.[325]
Esoteric Christians regard Christianity as a mystery religion,[326][327] and profess the existence and possession of certain esoteric doctrines or practices,[328][329] hidden from the public but accessible only to a narrow circle of "enlightened", "initiated", or highly educated people.[330][331] Some of the esoteric Christian institutions include the Rosicrucian Fellowship, the Anthroposophical Society and Martinism.
Christian culture
Set of pictures showcasing Christian culture and famous Christian leaders
Western culture, throughout most of its history, has been nearly equivalent to Christian culture, and a large portion of the population of the Western hemisphere can be described as cultural Christians. The notion of "Europe" and the "Western World" has been intimately connected with the concept of "Christianity and Christendom" many even attribute Christianity for being the link that created a unified European identity.[332]
Though Western culture contained several polytheistic religions during its early years under the Greek and Roman empires, as the centralized Roman power waned, the dominance of the Catholic Church was the only consistent force in Europe.[333] Until the Age of Enlightenment,[334] Christian culture guided the course of philosophy, literature, art, music and science.[333][335] Christian disciplines of the respective arts have subsequently developed into Christian philosophy, Christian art, Christian music, Christian literature etc.
Christianity has had a significant impact on education as the church created the bases of the Western system of education,[336] and was the sponsor of founding universities in the Western world; as the university is generally regarded as an institution that has its origin in the Medieval Christian setting.[159][160] Historically, Christianity has often been a patron of science and medicine. It has been prolific in the foundation of schools, universities and hospitals, and many Catholic clergy;[337] Jesuits in particular,[338][339] have been active in the sciences throughout history and have made significant contributions to the development of science.[340] Protestantism also has had an important influence on science. According to the Merton Thesis, there was a positive correlation between the rise of English Puritanism and German Pietism on the one hand and early experimental science on the other.[341] The Civilizing influence of Christianity includes social welfare,[342] founding hospitals,[343] economics (as the Protestant work ethic),[344][345] politics,[346] architecture,[347] literature,[348] personal hygiene,[349][350] and family life.[351]
Eastern Christians (particularly Nestorian Christians) contributed to the Arab Islamic Civilization during the reign of the Ummayad and the Abbasid by translating works of Greek philosophers to Syriac and afterwards to Arabic.[352][353][354] They also excelled in philosophy, science, theology and medicine.[355][356][357] And many scholars of the House of Wisdom were of Christian background.[358]
Christians have made a myriad of contributions to human progress in a broad and diverse range of fields,[359] including philosophy,[360] science and technology,[337][361][362][363][364] fine arts and architecture,[365] politics, literatures, music,[366] and business.[367] According to 100 Years of Nobel Prizes a review of Nobel prizes award between 1901 and 2000 reveals that (65.4%) of Nobel Prizes Laureates, have identified Christianity in its various forms as their religious preference.[368]
Postchristianity[369] is the term for the decline of Christianity, particularly in Europe, Canada, Australia and to a minor degree the Southern Cone, in the 20th and 21st centuries, considered in terms of postmodernism. It refers to the loss of Christianity's monopoly on values and world view in historically Christian societies.
Cultural Christians are secular people with a Christian heritage who may not believe in the religious claims of Christianity, but who retain an affinity for the popular culture, art, music and so on related to it. Another frequent application of the term is to distinguish political groups in areas of mixed religious backgrounds.
Ecumenism
Ecumenical worship service at the monastery of Taizé in France
Christian groups and denominations have long expressed ideals of being reconciled, and in the 20th century, Christian ecumenism advanced in two ways.[370] One way was greater cooperation between groups, such as the World Evangelical Alliance founded in 1846 in London or the Edinburgh Missionary Conference of Protestants in 1910, the Justice, Peace and Creation Commission of the World Council of Churches founded in 1948 by Protestant and Orthodox churches, and similar national councils like the National Council of Churches in Australia which includes Catholics.[370]
The other way was institutional union with United and uniting churches, a practice that can be traced back to unions between Lutherans and Calvinists in early 19th-century Germany. Congregationalist, Methodist and Presbyterian churches united in 1925 to form the United Church of Canada,[371] and in 1977 to form the Uniting Church in Australia. The Church of South India was formed in 1947 by the union of Anglican, Baptist, Methodist, Congregationalist and Presbyterian churches.[372]
The ecumenical, monastic Taizé Community is notable for being composed of more than one hundred brothers from Protestant and Catholic traditions.[373] The community emphasizes the reconciliation of all denominations and its main church, located in Taizé, Saône-et-Loire, France, is named the "Church of Reconciliation".[373] The community is internationally known, attracting over 100,000 young pilgrims annually.[374]
Steps towards reconciliation on a global level were taken in 1965 by the Catholic and Orthodox churches mutually revoking the excommunications that marked their Great Schism in 1054;[375] the Anglican Catholic International Commission (ARCIC) working towards full communion between those churches since 1970;[376] and some Lutheran and Catholic churches signing the Joint Declaration on the Doctrine of Justification in 1999 to address conflicts at the root of the Protestant Reformation. In 2006, the World Methodist Council, representing all Methodist denominations, adopted the declaration.[377]
Criticism and apologetics
A copy of the Summa Theologica, a famous Christian apologetic work
Criticism of Christianity and Christians goes back to the Apostolic Age, with the New Testament recording friction between the followers of Jesus and the Pharisees and scribes (e.g. Matthew 15:1–20 and Mark 7:1–23).[378] In the 2nd century, Christianity was criticized by the Jews on various grounds, e.g. that the prophecies of the Hebrew Bible could not have been fulfilled by Jesus, given that he did not have a successful life.[379] Additionally a sacrifice to remove sins in advance, for everyone or as a human being, did not fit to the Jewish sacrifice ritual, furthermore God is said to judge people on their deeds instead of their beliefs.[380][381] One of the first comprehensive attacks on Christianity came from the Greek philosopher Celsus, who wrote The True Word, a polemic criticizing Christians as being unprofitable members of society.[382][383] In response, the church father Origen published his treatise Contra Celsum, or Against Celsus, a seminal work of Christian apologetics, which systematically addressed Celsus's criticisms and brought Christianity a level of academic respectability.[383]
By the 3rd century, criticism of Christianity had mounted, partly as a defense against it. Wild rumors about Christians were widely circulated, claiming that they were atheists and that, as part of their rituals, they devoured human infants and engaged in incestuous orgies.[384][385] The Neoplatonist philosopher Porphyry wrote the fifteen-volume Adversus Christianos as a comprehensive attack on Christianity, in part building on the teachings of Plotinus.[386][387]
By the 12th century, the Mishneh Torah (i.e., Rabbi Moses Maimonides) was criticizing Christianity on the grounds of idol worship, in that Christians attributed divinity to Jesus who had a physical body.[388] In the 19th century, Nietzsche began to write a series of polemics on the "unnatural" teachings of Christianity (e.g. sexual abstinence), and continued his criticism of Christianity to the end of his life.[389] In the 20th century, the philosopher Bertrand Russell expressed his criticism of Christianity in Why I Am Not a Christian, formulating his rejection of Christianity in the setting of logical arguments.[390]
Criticism of Christianity continues to date, e.g. Jewish and Muslim theologians criticize the doctrine of the Trinity held by most Christians, stating that this doctrine in effect assumes that there are three Gods, running against the basic tenet of monotheism.[391] New Testament scholar Robert M. Price has outlined the possibility that some Bible stories are based partly on myth in "The Christ Myth Theory and its problems".[392]
Christian apologetics aims to present a rational basis for Christianity. The word "apologetic" comes from the Greek word "apologeomai", meaning "in defense of". Christian apologetics has taken many forms over the centuries, starting with Paul the Apostle. The philosopher Thomas Aquinas presented five arguments for God's existence in the Summa Theologica, while his Summa contra Gentiles was a major apologetic work.[393][394] Another famous apologist, G. K. Chesterton, wrote in the early twentieth century about the benefits of religion and, specifically, Christianity. Famous for his use of paradox, Chesterton explained that while Christianity had the most mysteries, it was the most practical religion.[395][396] He pointed to the advance of Christian civilizations as proof of its practicality.[397] The physicist and priest John Polkinghorne, in his Questions of Truth discusses the subject of religion and science, a topic that other Christian apologists such as Ravi Zacharias, John Lennox and William Lane Craig have engaged, with the latter two men opining that the inflationary Big Bang model is evidence for the existence of God.[398]
See also
Christian mythology
Christianity and politics
Christianity and Theosophy
Church architecture
Manichaeism
One true church
Outline of Christianity
Notes
From Ancient Greek Greek: Χριστός Khristós (Latinized as Christus), translating Hebrew מָשִׁיחַ, Māšîăḥ, meaning "the anointed one", with the Latin suffixes -ian and -itas.
The term "Christian" (Greek Χριστιανός) was first used in reference to Jesus's disciples in the city of Antioch[Acts 11:26] about 44 AD, meaning "followers of Christ". The name was given by the non-Jewish inhabitants of Antioch to the disciples of Jesus. In the New Testament the names by which the disciples were known among themselves were "brethren", "the faithful", "elect", "saints", and "believers". The earliest recorded use of the term "Christianity" (Greek Χριστιανισμός) was by Ignatius of Antioch, around 100 AD.[1]
"Good news" is a translation of the Ancient Greek term εὐαγγέλιον euangélion, from which the terms evangelical and evangelism derive.
A flexible term; defined as all forms of Protestantism with the notable exception of the historical denominations deriving directly from the Protestant Reformation.
References
Christianity's status as monotheistic is affirmed in, among other sources, the Catholic Encyclopedia (article "Monotheism"); William F. Albright, From the Stone Age to Christianity; H. Richard Niebuhr; About.com, Monotheistic Religion resources; Kirsch, God Against the Gods; Woodhead, An Introduction to Christianity; The Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia Monotheism; The New Dictionary of Cultural Literacy, monotheism; New Dictionary of Theology, Paul, pp. 496–99; Meconi. "Pagan Monotheism in Late Antiquity". p. 111f.
Zoll, Rachel (19 December 2011). "Study: Christian population shifts from Europe". Associated Press. Retrieved 25 February 2012.
"The Global Religious Landscape: Christianity" (PDF). Pew Research Center. December 2012. Retrieved 30 July 2012.
33.39% of ~7.2 billion world population (under the section 'People') "World". The World Factbook. CIA.
"Christianity 2015: Religious Diversity and Personal Contact" (PDF). gordonconwell.edu. January 2015. Retrieved 29 May 2015.
ANALYSIS (19 December 2011). "Global Christianity". Pew Research Center. Retrieved 17 August 2012.
Woodhead, Linda (2004). Christianity: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. n.p.
Religions in Global Society – Page 146, Peter Beyer – 2006
Cambridge University Historical Series, An Essay on Western Civilization in Its Economic Aspects, p.40: Hebraism, like Hellenism, has been an all-important factor in the development of Western Civilization; Judaism, as the precursor of Christianity, has indirectly had had much to do with shaping the ideals and morality of western nations since the christian era.
Caltron J.H Hayas, Christianity and Western Civilization (1953), Stanford University Press, p.2: "That certain distinctive features of our Western civilization — the civilization of western Europe and of America— have been shaped chiefly by Judaeo – Graeco – Christianity, Catholic and Protestant."
Horst Hutter, University of New York, Shaping the Future: Nietzsche's New Regime of the Soul And Its Ascetic Practices (2004), p.111:three mighty founders of Western culture, namely Socrates, Jesus, and Plato.
Fred Reinhard Dallmayr, Dialogue Among Civilizations: Some Exemplary Voices (2004), p.22: Western civilization is also sometimes described as "Christian" or "Judaeo- Christian" civilization.
Stephen Benko (1984). Pagan Rome and the Early Christians. Indiana University Press. pp. 22–. ISBN 978-0-253-34286-7.
Doris L. Bergen (9 November 2000). Twisted Cross: The German Christian Movement in the Third Reich. Univ of North Carolina Press. pp. 60–. ISBN 978-0-8078-6034-2.
Catherine Cory (13 August 2015). Christian Theological Tradition. Routledge. pp. 20–. ISBN 978-1-317-34958-7.
Robinson 2000, p. 229
Esler. The Early Christian World. p. 157f.
Religion in the Roman Empire, Wiley-Blackwell, by James B. Rives, page 196
Catholic encyclopedia New Advent
McManners, Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity, pp. 301–03.
Muslim-Christian Relations. Amsterdam University Press. 2006. ISBN 978-90-5356-938-2. Retrieved 18 October 2007. The enthusiasm for evangelization among the Christians was also accompanied by the awareness that the most immediate problem to solve was how to serve the huge number of new converts. Simatupang said, if the number of the Christians were double or triple, then the number of the ministers should also be doubled or tripled and the tole of the laity should be maximized and Christian service to society through schools, universities, hospitals and orphanages, should be increased. In addition, for him the Christian mission should be involved in the struggle for justice amid the process of modernization.
Fred Kammer (1 May 2004). Doing Faith Justice. Paulist Press. p. 77. ISBN 978-0-8091-4227-9. Retrieved 18 October 2007. Theologians, bishops, and preachers urged the Christian community to be as compassionate as their God was, reiterating that creation was for all of humanity. They also accepted and developed the identification of Christ with the poor and the requisite Christian duty to the poor. Religious congregations and individual charismatic leaders promoted the development of a number of helping institutions-hospitals, hospices for pilgrims, orphanages, shelters for unwed mothers-that laid the foundation for the modern "large network of hospitals, orphanages and schools, to serve the poor and society at large."
Christian Church Women: Shapers of a Movement. Chalice Press. March 1994. ISBN 978-0-8272-0463-8. Retrieved 18 October 2007. In the central provinces of India they established schools, orphanages, hospitals, and churches, and spread the gospel message in zenanas.
Herbermann, Charles George (1908). The Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company,. pp. 272, 273. ISBN 978-1174601828.
S. T. Kimbrough, ed. (2005). Orthodox and Wesleyan Scriptural understanding and practice. St Vladimir's Seminary Press. ISBN 978-0-88141-301-4.
Olson, The Mosaic of Christian Belief.
Ehrman, Bart (2003). "Introduction: Recouping Our Losses". Lost Christianities: the battles for scripture and the faiths we never knew. Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-19-518249-1. Many of these Christian groups, of course, refuse to consider other such groups Christian.
Avis, Paul (2002) The Christian Church: An Introduction to the Major Traditions, SPCK, London, ISBN 0-281-05246-8 paperback
White, Howard A. The History of the Church.
Cummins, Duane D. (1991). A handbook for Today's Disciples in the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) (Revised ed.). St Louis, MO: Chalice Press. ISBN 0-8272-1425-1.
Ron Rhodes, The Complete Guide to Christian Denominations, Harvest House Publishers, 2005, ISBN 0-7369-1289-4
Pelikan/Hotchkiss, Creeds and Confessions of Faith in the Christian Tradition.
""We Believe in One God….": The Nicene Creed and Mass". Catholics United for the Fath. February 2005. Retrieved 16 June 2014. (Registration required (help)).
Encyclopedia of Religion, "Arianism".
Catholic Encyclopedia, "Council of Ephesus".
Christian History Institute, First Meeting of the Council of Chalcedon.
Peter Theodore Farrington (February 2006). "The Oriental Orthodox Rejection of Chalcedon". Glastonbury Review. The British Orthodox Church (113). Archived from the original on 19 June 2008.
Pope Leo I, Letter to Flavian
Catholic Encyclopedia, "Athanasian Creed".
"Our Common Heritage as Christians". The United Methodist Church. Archived from the original on 14 January 2006. Retrieved 31 December 2007.
Metzger/Coogan, Oxford Companion to the Bible, pp. 513, 649.
Acts 2:24, 2:31–32, 3:15, 3:26, 4:10, 5:30, 10:40–41, 13:30, 13:34, 13:37, 17:30–31, Romans 10:9, 1 Cor. 15:15, 6:14, 2 Cor. 4:14, Gal 1:1, Eph 1:20, Col 2:12, 1 Thess. 11:10, Heb. 13:20, 1 Pet. 1:3, 1:21
Wikisource:Nicene Creed
Hanegraaff. Resurrection: The Capstone in the Arch of Christianity.
"The Significance of the Death and Resurrection of Jesus for the Christian". Australian Catholic University National. Archived from the original on 1 September 2007. Retrieved 16 May 2007.
John, 5:24, 6:39–40, 6:47, 10:10, 11:25–26, and 17:3
This is drawn from a number of sources, especially the early Creeds, the Catechism of the Catholic Church, certain theological works, and various Confessions drafted during the Reformation including the Thirty Nine Articles of the Church of England, works contained in the Book of Concord.
Fuller, The Foundations of New Testament Christology, p. 11.
A Jesus Seminar conclusion: "in the view of the Seminar, he did not rise bodily from the dead; the resurrection is based instead on visionary experiences of Peter, Paul, and Mary."
Funk. The Acts of Jesus: What Did Jesus Really Do?.
Lorenzen. Resurrection, Discipleship, Justice: Affirming the Resurrection Jesus Christ Today, p. 13.
Ball/Johnsson (ed.). The Essential Jesus.
Eisenbaum, Pamela (Winter 2004). "A Remedy for Having Been Born of Woman: Jesus, Gentiles, and Genealogy in Romans" (PDF). Journal of Biblical Literature. 123 (4): 671–702. doi:10.2307/3268465. JSTOR 3268465. Retrieved 3 April 2009. (Subscription required (help)).
Wright, N.T. What Saint Paul Really Said: Was Paul of Tarsus the Real Founder of Christianity? (Oxford, 1997), p. 121.
CCC 846; Vatican II, Lumen Gentium 14
See quotations from Council of Trent on Justification at Justforcatholics.org
Westminster Confession, Chapter X Archived 28 May 2014 at the Wayback Machine.;
Spurgeon, A Defense of Calvinism Archived 10 April 2008 at the Wayback Machine..
"Grace and Justification". Catechism of the Catholic Church. Archived from the original on 15 August 2010.
Definition of the Fourth Lateran Council quoted in Catechism of the Catholic Church §253.
Kelly. Early Christian Doctrines. pp. 87–90.
Alexander. New Dictionary of Biblical Theology. p. 514f.
McGrath. Historical Theology. p. 61.
Metzger/Coogan. Oxford Companion to the Bible. p. 782.
Kelly. The Athanasian Creed.
Oxford, "Encyclopedia Of Christianity, pg1207
Heidi J. Hornik and Mikeal Carl Parsons, Interpreting Christian Art: Reflections on Christian art, Mercer University Press, 2003, ISBN 0-86554-850-1, pp. 32–35.
Examples of ante-Nicene statements:
Hence all the power of magic became dissolved; and every bond of wickedness was destroyed, men's ignorance was taken away, and the old kingdom abolished God Himself appearing in the form of a man, for the renewal of eternal life.
— St. Ignatius of Antioch in Letter to the Ephesians, ch.4, shorter version, Roberts-Donaldson translation
We have also as a Physician the Lord our God Jesus the Christ the only-begotten Son and Word, before time began, but who afterwards became also man, of Mary the virgin. For 'the Word was made flesh.' Being incorporeal, He was in the body; being impassible, He was in a passable body; being immortal, He was in a mortal body; being life, He became subject to corruption, that He might free our souls from death and corruption, and heal them, and might restore them to health, when they were diseased with ungodliness and wicked lusts
— St. Ignatius of Antioch in Letter to the Ephesians, ch.7, shorter version, Roberts-Donaldson translation
The Church, though dispersed throughout the whole world, even to the ends of the earth, has received from the apostles and their disciples this faith: ...one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven, and earth, and the sea, and all things that are in them; and in one Christ Jesus, the Son of God, who became incarnate for our salvation; and in the Holy Spirit, who proclaimed through the prophets the dispensations of God, and the advents, and the birth from a virgin, and the passion, and the resurrection from the dead, and the ascension into heaven in the flesh of the beloved Christ Jesus, our Lord, and His manifestation from heaven in the glory of the Father 'to gather all things in one,' and to raise up anew all flesh of the whole human race, in order that to Christ Jesus, our Lord, and God, and Savior, and King, according to the will of the invisible Father, 'every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth, and that every tongue should confess; to him, and that He should execute just judgment towards all...
— St. Irenaeus in Against Heresies, ch.X, v.I, Donaldson, Sir James (1950), Ante Nicene Fathers, Volume 1: Apostolic Fathers, Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, William B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., ISBN 978-0802880871
For, in the name of God, the Father and Lord of the universe, and of our Savior Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Spirit, they then receive the washing with water
— Justin Martyr in First Apology, ch. LXI, Donaldson, Sir James (1950), Ante Nicene Fathers, Volume 1: Apostolic Fathers, Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, ISBN 978-0802880871
Olson, Roger E. (2002). The Trinity. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 15. ISBN 978-0-8028-4827-7.
Fowler. World Religions: An Introduction for Students. p. 58.
Theophilus of Antioch Apologia ad Autolycum II 15
McManners, Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity. p. 50.
Tertullian De Pudicitia chapter 21
McManners, Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity, p. 53.
Moltman, Jurgen. The Trinity and the Kingdom: The Doctrine of God. Tr. from German. Fortress Press, 1993. ISBN 0-8006-2825-X
Harnack, History of Dogma.
Pocket Dictionary of Church History Nathan P. Feldmeth p.135 "Unitarianism. Unitarians emerged from Protestant Christian beginnings in the sixteenth century with a central focus on the unity of God and subsequent denial of the doctrine of the Trinity"
Virkler, Henry A. (2007). Ayayo, Karelynne Gerber, ed. Hermeneutics: Principles and Processes of Biblical Interpretation (2nd ed.). Grand Rapids, USA: Baker Academic. p. 21. ISBN 978-0-8010-3138-0.
"Inspiration and Truth of Sacred Scripture". Catechism of the Catholic Church. Archived from the original on 9 September 2010.(§105–108)
Second Helvetic Confession, Of the Holy Scripture Being the True Word of God
Chicago Statement on Biblical Inerrancy, online text
Metzger/Coogan, Oxford Companion to the Bible. p. 39.
Ehrman, Bart D. (2005). Misquoting Jesus: the story behind who changed the Bible and why. San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco ISBN 978-0060738174 pages 209, 183
"1 Timothy 2:11–12 NIV – A woman should learn in quietness and". Bible Gateway. Retrieved 12 March 2013.
"1 corinthians 14:34–35 NIV – Women should remain silent in the". Bible Gateway. Retrieved 12 March 2013.
"1 corinthians 11:2–16 NIV – On Covering the Head in Worship – I". Bible Gateway. Retrieved 12 March 2013.
Wright, N.T. (1992). The New Testament and the People of God. Minneapolis: Fortress Press. pp. 435–443. ISBN 978-0-8006-2681-5.
"The Gospel of Thomas Collection – Translations and Resources". Gnosis.org. Retrieved 12 March 2013.
"Luke 17:20–21 NIV – The Coming of the Kingdom of God". Bible Gateway. Retrieved 12 March 2013.
"Reflections on religions". Mmnet.com.au. Retrieved 12 March 2013.
Kelly. Early Christian Doctrines. pp. 69–78.
Catechism of the Catholic Church, The Holy Spirit, Interpreter of Scripture § 115–118. Archived 25 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine.
Thomas Aquinas, "Whether in Holy Scripture a word may have several senses" Archived 6 September 2006 at the Wayback Machine.
Catechism of the Catholic Church, §116 Archived 25 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine.
Second Vatican Council, Dei Verbum (V.19) Archived 31 May 2014 at the Wayback Machine..
Catechism of the Catholic Church, "The Holy Spirit, Interpreter of Scripture" § 113. Archived 25 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine.
Catechism of the Catholic Church, "The Interpretation of the Heritage of Faith" § 85. Archived 3 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine.
Keith A. Mathison (2001). "Introduction". The Shape of Sola Scriptura. Canon Press. p. 15. ISBN 978-1-885767-74-5.
Foutz, Scott David. "Martin Luther and Scripture". Quodlibet Journal. Archived from the original on 14 April 2000. Retrieved 16 June 2014.
John Calvin, Commentaries on the Catholic Epistles 2 Peter 3:14–18
"The Second Helvetic Confession, Chapter 2 – Of Interpreting the Holy Scriptures; and of Fathers, Councils, and Traditions". Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.). 11 December 2007. Archived from the original on 11 December 2007. Retrieved 1 January 2015.
Sproul. Knowing Scripture, pp. 45–61; Bahnsen, A Reformed Confession Regarding Hermeneutics (article 6).
Elwell, Walter A. (1984). Evangelical Dictionary of Theology. Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Book House. p. 565. ISBN 978-0-8010-3413-8.
Johnson, Elliott (1990). Expository hermeneutics : an introduction. Grand Rapids Mich.: Academie Books. ISBN 978-0-310-34160-4.
Terry, Milton (1974). Biblical hermeneutics : a treatise on the interpretation of the Old and New Testaments. Grand Rapids Mich.: Zondervan Pub. House. p. 205. (1890 edition page 103, view1, view2)
e.g., in his commentary on Matthew 1 (§III.1). Matthew Henry interprets the twin sons of Judah, Phares and Zara, as an allegory of the Gentile and Jewish Christians. For a contemporary treatment, see Glenny, Typology: A Summary Of The Present Evangelical Discussion.
Gill, N.S. "Which Nation First Adopted Christianity?". About.com. Retrieved 8 October 2011. Armenia is considered the first nation to have adopted Christianity as the state religion in a traditional date of c. A.D. 301.
Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologicum, Supplementum Tertiae Partis questions 69 through 99
Calvin, John. "Institutes of the Christian Religion, Book Three, Ch. 25". www.reformed.org. Retrieved 1 January 2008.
Catholic Encyclopedia, "Particular Judgment".
Ott, Grundriß der Dogmatik, p. 566.
David Moser, What the Orthodox believe concerning prayer for the dead.
Ken Collins, What Happens to Me When I Die?.
"Audience of 4 August 1999". Vatican.va. 4 August 1999. Retrieved 19 November 2010.
Catholic Encyclopedia, "The Communion of Saints".
"The death that Adam brought into the world is spiritual as well as physical, and only those who gain entrance into the Kingdom of God will exist eternally. However, this division will not occur until Armageddon, when all people will be resurrected and given a chance to gain eternal life. In the meantime, "the dead are conscious of nothing." What is God's Purpose for the Earth?" Official Site of Jehovah's Witnesses. Watchtower, 15 July 2002.
Justin Martyr, First Apology §LXVII
Ignazio Silone, Bread and Wine (1937).
Cross/Livingstone. The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church. p. 1435f.
Holy Apostolic Catholic Assyrian Church of the East, Archdiocese of Australia, New Zealand and Lebanon.
Fortescue, Adrian (1912). "Christian Calendar". The Catholic Encyclopedia. Robert Appleton Company. Retrieved 18 July 2014.
Hickman. Handbook of the Christian Year.
"ANF04. Fathers of the Third Century: Tertullian, Part Fourth; Minucius Felix; Commodian; Origen, Parts First and Second | Christian Classics Ethereal Library". Ccel.org. 1 June 2005. Retrieved 5 May 2009.
Minucius Felix speaks of the cross of Jesus in its familiar form, likening it to objects with a crossbeam or to a man with arms outstretched in prayer (Octavius of Minucius Felix, chapter XXIX).
"At every forward step and movement, at every going in and out, when we put on our clothes and shoes, when we bathe, when we sit at table, when we light the lamps, on couch, on seat, in all the ordinary actions of daily life, we trace upon the forehead the sign." (Tertullian, De Corona, chapter 3)
Dilasser. The Symbols of the Church.
Catholic Encyclopedia, "Symbolism of the Fish".
"Through Baptism we are freed from sin and reborn as sons of God; we become members of Christ, are incorporated into the Church and made sharers in her mission" (Catechism of the Catholic Church, 1213 Archived 22 July 2016 at the Wayback Machine.); "Holy Baptism is the sacrament by which God adopts us as his children and makes us members of Christ's Body, the Church, and inheritors of the kingdom of God" (Book of Common Prayer, 1979, Episcopal ); "Baptism is the sacrament of initiation and incorporation into the body of Christ" (By Water and The Spirit – The Official United Methodist Understanding of Baptism (PDF) Archived 13 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine.;
"As an initiatory rite into membership of the Family of God, baptismal candidates are symbolically purified or washed as their sins have been forgiven and washed away" (William H. Brackney, Doing Baptism Baptist Style – Believer's Baptism Archived 7 January 2010 at the Wayback Machine.)
"After the proclamation of faith, the baptismal water is prayed over and blessed as the sign of the goodness of God's creation. The person to be baptized is also prayed over and blessed with sanctified oil as the sign that his creation by God is holy and good. And then, after the solemn proclamation of "Alleluia" (God be praised), the person is immersed three times in the water in the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit" (Orthodox Church in America: Baptism).
"In the Orthodox Church we totally immerse, because such total immersion symbolizes death. What death? The death of the "old, sinful man". After Baptism we are freed from the dominion of sin, even though after Baptism we retain an inclination and tendency toward evil.", Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Australia, article "Baptism Archived 30 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine.".
Catechism of the Catholic Church 403, 1231, 1233, 1250, 1252.
Catechism of the Catholic Church 1240.
Alexander, T. D.; Rosner, B. S, eds. (2001). "Prayer". New Dictionary of Biblical Theology. Downers Grove, IL: Intervarsity Press.
Ferguson, S. B. & Packer, J. (1988). "Saints". New Dictionary of Theology. Downers Grove, IL: Intervarsity Press.
Madeleine Gray, The Protestant Reformation, (Sussex Academic Press, 2003), page 140.
"Catechism of the Catholic Church: Part Four – Christian Prayer". Va. Retrieved 19 November 2010.
Rennie, Bryan. "Zoroastrianism: The Iranian Roots of Christianity".
Bowker, John (1997). World Religions: The Great Faiths Explored & Explained. London: Dorling Kindersley Limited. p. 13. ISBN 0-7894-1439-2.
"The World Factbook: Armenia". CIA. Retrieved 8 October 2011.
Brunner, Borgna (2006). Time Almanac with Information Please 2007. New York: Time Home Entertainment. p. 685. ISBN 978-1-933405-49-0.
Theo Maarten van Lint (2009). "The Formation of Armenian Identity in the First Millenium". Church History and Religious Culture. 89 (1/3,): 269.
Theodosian Code XVI.i.2, in: Bettenson. Documents of the Christian Church. p. 31.
Orlandis, A Short History of the Catholic Church (1993), preface.
McManners, Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity, p. 37f.
Eusebius of Caesarea, the author of Ecclesiastical History in the 4th century, states that St. Mark came to Egypt in the first or third year of the reign of Emperor Claudius, i.e. 41 or 43 AD. "Two Thousand years of Coptic Christianity" Otto F.A. Meinardus p28.
Neil Lettinga. "A History of the Christian Church in Western North Africa". Archived from the original on 30 July 2001.
"Allaboutreligion.org". Allaboutreligion.org. Archived from the original on 16 November 2010. Retrieved 19 November 2010.
Cameron 2006, pp. 42.
Cameron 2006, pp. 47.
Browning 1992, pp. 198–208.
Browning 1992, p. 218.
Gonzalez, The Story of Christianity, pp. 238–42.
Mullin, 2008, p. 88.
Mullin, 2008, p. 93–4.
Gonzalez, The Story of Christianity, pp. 244–47.
Gonzalez, The Story of Christianity, p. 260.
Gonzalez, The Story of Christianity, pp. 278–81.
Rudy, The Universities of Europe, 1100–1914, p. 40
Gonzalez, The Story of Christianity, pp. 305, 312, 314f..
Rüegg, Walter: "Foreword. The University as a European Institution", in: A History of the University in Europe. Vol. 1: Universities in the Middle Ages, Cambridge University Press, 1992, ISBN 0-521-36105-2, pp. XIX–XX
Verger, Jacques (1999). Culture, enseignement et société en Occident aux XIIe et XIIIe siècles (in French) (1st ed.). Presses universitaires de Rennes in Rennes. ISBN 286847344X. Retrieved 17 June 2014.
Riché, Pierre (1978): "Education and Culture in the Barbarian West: From the Sixth through the Eighth Century", Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, ISBN 0-87249-376-8, pp. 126–7, 282–98
Gonzalez, The Story of Christianity, pp. 303–07, 310f., 384–86.
Gonzalez, The Story of Christianity, pp. 305, 310f., 316f.
Gonzalez, The Story of Christianity, pp. 321–23, 365f.
Gonzalez, The Story of Christianity, pp. 292–300.
Riley-Smith. The Oxford History of the Crusades.
The Western Church was called Latin at the time by the Eastern Christians and non Christians due to its conducting of its rituals and affairs in the Latin language
"The Great Schism: The Estrangement of Eastern and Western Christendom". Orthodox Information Centre. Retrieved 26 May 2007.
Duffy, Saints and Sinners (1997), p. 91
Gonzalez, The Story of Christianity, pp. 300, 304–05.
Gonzalez, The Story of Christianity, pp. 310, 383, 385, 391.
Simon. Great Ages of Man: The Reformation. p. 7.
Simon. Great Ages of Man: The Reformation. pp. 39, 55–61.
Schama. A History of Britain. pp. 306–10.
National Geographic, 254.
Jensen, De Lamar (1992), Renaissance Europe, ISBN 0-395-88947-2
Levey, Michael (1967). Early Renaissance. Penguin Books.
Bokenkotter, A Concise History of the Catholic Church, pp. 242–44.
Simon. Great Ages of Man: The Reformation. pp. 109–120.
A general overview about the English discussion is given in Coffey, Persecution and Toleration in Protestant England 1558–1689.
Novak, Michael (1988). Catholic social thought and liberal institutions: Freedom with justice. Transaction. p. 63. ISBN 978-0-88738-763-0.
Mortimer Chambers, The Western Experience (vol. 2) chapter 21.
Religion and the State in Russia and China: Suppression, Survival, and Revival, by Christopher Marsh, page 47. Continuum International Publishing Group, 2011.
Inside Central Asia: A Political and Cultural History, by Dilip Hiro. Penguin, 2009.
Adappur, Abraham (2000). Religion and the Cultural Crisis in India and the West. Intercultural Publications. ISBN 978-81-85574-47-9. Forced Conversion under Atheistic Regimes: It might be added that the most modern example of forced "conversions" came not from any theocratic state, but from a professedly atheist government — that of the Soviet Union under the Communists.
Geoffrey Blainey; A Short History of Christianity; Viking; 2011; p.494"
Altermatt, Urs (2007). "Katholizismus und Nation: Vier Modelle in europäisch-vergleichender Perspektive". In Urs Altermatt, Franziska Metzger. Religion und Nation: Katholizismen im Europa des 19. und 20. Jahrhundert (in German). Kohlhammer. pp. 15–34. ISBN 978-3-17-019977-4.
Heimann, Mary (1995). Catholic Devotion in Victorian England. Clarendon Press. pp. 165–73. ISBN 0-19-820597-X.
"Religion may become extinct in nine nations, study says". BBC News. 22 March 2011.
"図録▽世界各国の宗教". .ttcn.ne.jp. Retrieved 17 August 2012.
Fargues, Philippe (1998). "A Demographic Perspective". In Pacini, Andrea. Christian Communities in the Middle East. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-829388-7.
Werner Ustorf. "A missiological postscript", in McLeod and Ustorf (eds), The Decline of Christendom in (Western) Europe, 1750–2000, (Cambridge University Press, 2003) pp. 219–20.
"The Future of World Religions: Population Growth Projections, 2010–2050" (PDF).
"Pewforum: Christianity (2010)" (PDF). Retrieved 14 May 2014.
Johnstone, Patrick, "The Future of the Global Church: History, Trends and Possibilities", p. 100, fig 4.10 & 4.11
Hillerbrand, Hans J., "Encyclopedia of Protestantism: 4-volume Set", p. 1815, "Observers carefully comparing all these figures in the total context will have observed the even more startling finding that for the first itime ever in the history of Protestantism, Wider Protestants will by 2050 have become almost exactly as numerous as Catholics – each with just over 1.5 billion followers, or 17 percent of the world, with Protestants growing considerably faster than Catholics each year."
Juergensmeyer, Mark (3 November 2005). "Religion in Global Civil Society". Oxford University Press. p. 16.
Barker, Isabelle V. (2005). "Engendering Charismatic Economies: Pentecostalism, Global Political Economy, and the Crisis of Social Reproduction". American Political Science Association. pp. 2, 8 and footnote 14 on page 8. Archived from the original on 17 December 2013. Retrieved March 25, 2010.
Encyclopædia Britannica table of religions, by region. Retrieved November 2007. Archived 18 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
ARIS 2008 Report: Part IA – Belonging. "American Religious Identification Survey 2008". B27.cc.trincoll.edu. Archived from the original on 18 May 2011. Retrieved 19 November 2010.
"New UK opinion poll shows continuing collapse of 'Christendom'". Ekklesia.co.uk. 23 December 2006. Retrieved 19 November 2010.
Barrett/Kurian.World Christian Encyclopedia, p. 139 (Britain), 281 (France), 299 (Germany).
"Christians in the Middle East". BBC News. 15 December 2005. Retrieved 19 November 2010.
Katz, Gregory (25 December 2006). "Is Christianity dying in the birthplace of Jesus?". Chron.com. Retrieved 19 November 2010.
"Number of Christians among young Koreans decreases by 5% per year". Omf.org. Archived from the original on 26 February 2009. Retrieved 19 November 2010.
"Christianity fading in Taiwan | American Buddhist Net". Americanbuddhist.net. 10 November 2007. Archived from the original on 24 February 2009. Retrieved 5 May 2009.
Greenlees, Donald (26 December 2007). "A Gambling-Fueled Boom Adds to a Church's Bane". Macao: Nytimes.com. Retrieved 30 June 2011.
Barry A. Kosmin; Ariela Keysar (2009). "American Religious Identification Survey (ARIS) 2008" (PDF). Hartford, Connecticut, USA: Trinity College. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 April 2009. Retrieved 1 April 2009.
"Religions in Canada—Census 2001". 2.statcan.ca. 9 March 2010. Retrieved 19 November 2010.
"Australian 2006 census – Religion". Censusdata.abs.gov.au. Retrieved 19 November 2010.
Table 28, 2006 Census Data – QuickStats About Culture and Identity – Tables. Archived 24 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
ANALYSIS (19 December 2011). "Europe". Pewforum.org. Retrieved 17 August 2012.
ANALYSIS (19 December 2011). "Americas". Pewforum.org. Retrieved 17 August 2012.
ANALYSIS (19 December 2011). "Global religious landscape: Christians". Pewforum.org. Retrieved 17 August 2012.
David Stoll, "Is Latin America Turning Protestant?" published Berkeley: University of California Press. 1990
Jeff Hadden (1997). "Pentecostalism". Archived from the original on 27 April 2006. Retrieved 24 September 2008.
Pew Forum on Religion; Public Life (24 April 2006). "Moved by the Spirit: Pentecostal Power and Politics after 100 Years". Retrieved 24 September 2008.
"Pentecostalism". Britannica Concise Encyclopedia. 2007. Archived from the original on 12 January 2009. Retrieved 21 December 2008.
Ed Gitre, Christianity Today Magazine (13 November 2000). "The CT Review: Pie-in-the-Sky Now".
Melton, J. Gordon (1 January 2005). "Encyclopedia of Protestantism". Infobase Publishing. p. 11. ISBN 978-0-8160-6983-5.
Milne, Bruce (2010). Know the Truth: A Handbook of Christian Belief. InterVarsity Press. p. 332. ISBN 0-83082-576-2.
Johnstone, Patrick; Miller, Duane Alexander (2015). "Believers in Christ from a Muslim Background: A Global Census". IJRR. 11 (10): 1–19. Retrieved 30 October 2015.
USSD Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor (2009). "International Religious Freedom Report 2009". Retrieved 2010-03-06.
"5,000 Azerbaijanis adopted Christianity" (in Russian). Day.az. 7 July 2007. Retrieved 30 January 2012.
"Christian Missionaries Becoming Active in Azerbaijan" (in Azerbaijani). Tehran Radio. 19 June 2011. Retrieved 12 August 2012.
Canada, Immigration and Refugee Board of (17 July 2013). "Algeria: Situation of Christians, including the treatment of Christians by society and by the authorities; availability of state protection; the fire at Tafat church; whether there were convictions for proselytism (2010 – July 2013) [DZA104491.FE]".
Muslims Turn to Christ – ChristianAction
"In Europe, many Muslims renounce Islam, embrace Christianity: Report".
Aghajanian, Liana (12 May 2014). "'Our second mother': Iran's converted Christians find sanctuary in Germany" – via The Guardian.
Gary Lane. "House Churches Growing in Iran". Cbn.com. Retrieved 17 August 2012.
David B. Barrett; George Thomas Kurian; Todd M. Johnson, eds. (February 15, 2001). World Christian Encyclopedia p.374. Oxford University Press USA. ISBN 0195079639.
AHMAD FAROUK MUSA; MOHD RADZIQ JALALUDDIN; AHMAD FUAD RAHMAT; EDRY FAIZAL EDDY YUSUF (22 October 2011). "What is Himpun about?". The Star. Archived from the original on 24 October 2011. Retrieved 16 December 2011.
"Christian Converts in Morocco Fear Fatwa Calling for Their Execution".
"Friesch Dagblad".
Cookson, Catharine (2003). Encyclopedia of religious freedom. Taylor & Francis. p. 207. ISBN 0-415-94181-4.
"TURKEY: Protestant church closed down – Church In Chains – Ireland :: An Irish voice for suffering, persecuted Christians Worldwide".
"Ekklesia – Turkish Protestants still face 'long path' to religious freedom". 8 March 2011.
khadijabibi (30 October 2009). "35,000 Muslims convert into Christianity each year in Turkey". Chowk.com. Archived from the original on 24 September 2012. Retrieved 19 November 2010.
"Нац состав.rar". Archived from the original on 23 July 2011. Retrieved 24 July 2011.
"Conversion rate". 30 December 2008 – via The Economist.
"Why Are Millions of Muslims Becoming Christian?".
Jeni Mitchell. "FREEradicals – Targeting Christians in Central Asia". Icsr.info. Archived from the original on 24 February 2012. Retrieved 17 August 2012.
"Despite Government Set-backs, Christianity Is Alive in Central Asia". Opendoorsusa.org. 30 November 2011. Archived from the original on 10 January 2012. Retrieved 17 August 2012.
Bareth, Narayan (23 February 2005). "State to bar religious conversion". BBC News.
"Religious Conversions". The Times of India. India.
"160,000 Have Converted Out of Hinduism in Malaysia in 25 Years". Christianaggression.org. 16 May 2005. Archived from the original on 23 November 2007. Retrieved 19 November 2010.
"Religions in Mongolia". Mongolia-attractions.com. Archived from the original on 13 May 2011. Retrieved 19 November 2010.
Religious Demographic Profiles – Pew Forum Archived 21 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine.
"Annual Report on International Religious Freedom for 2005 – Vietnam". U.S. Department of State. 30 June 2005. Archived from the original on 20 October 2006. Retrieved 11 March 2007.
"Christianity, non-religious register biggest growth: Census 2010". Newnation.sg. 13 January 2011. Retrieved 17 August 2012.
"In Indonesia, Lunar New Year an old practice for young Christians". Webcitation.org. Archived from the original on 15 August 2011. Retrieved 17 August 2012.
"In Indonesia, the Chinese go to church". Nytimes.com. 27 April 2006. Retrieved 17 August 2012.
"Christianity 2010: a view from the new Atlas of Global Christianity". Goliath.ecnext.com. 1 January 2010. Retrieved 17 August 2012.
"More People Claim Christian Faith in Japan".
Landau, Christopher (26 October 2009). "Will South Korea become Christian?". BBC News. Retrieved 17 August 2012.
Putnam, Democracies in Flux: The Evolution of Social Capital in Contemporary Society, p. 408.
McGrath, Christianity: An Introduction, p. xvi.
Peter Marber, Money Changes Everything: How Global Prosperity Is Reshaping Our Needs, Values and Lifestyles, p. 99.
Philip Jenkins God's Continent, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007, p. 56
"The future of the world's most popular religion is African". 25 December 2015 – via The Economist.
"Argentina". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 11 May 2008.
Løsere bånd, men fortsatt statskirke Archived 27 December 2012 at WebCite, ABC Nyheter
Staten skal ikke lenger ansette biskoper, NRK
Forbund, Human-Etisk. "Ingen avskaffelse: / Slik blir den nye statskirkeordningen".
"Costa Rica". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 11 May 2008.
"Denmark". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 11 May 2008.
"Church and State in Britain: The Church of privilege". Centre for Citizenship. Archived from the original on 11 May 2008. Retrieved 11 May 2008.
"McCain Praises Georgia For Adopting Christianity As Official State Religion". BeliefNet. Retrieved 11 April 2009.
"El Salvador". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 11 May 2008.
"Iceland". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 11 May 2008.
"Liechtenstein". U.S. Department of State. Retrieved 11 May 2008.
"Malta". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 11 May 2008.
"Monaco". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 11 May 2008.
"Vatican". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 11 May 2008.
"Cyprus". U.S. Department of State. Retrieved 11 May 2008.
"Global Christianity – A Report on the Size and Distribution of the World's Christian Population". 19 December 2011.
ANALYSIS (19 December 2011). "Table: Religious Composition by Country, in Percentages". Pewforum.org. Retrieved 17 August 2012.
"Divisions of Christianity". North Virginia College. Retrieved 31 December 2007.
"The LDS Restorationist movement, including Mormon denominations". Religious Tolerance. Retrieved 31 December 2007.
Ehrman, Bart D. (2003). Lost Christianities: The Battles for Scripture and the Faiths We Never Knew. Oxford University Press, USA. p. 1. ISBN 0-19-514183-0.
"Nicene Creed". Encyclopædia Britannica Online. Encyclopædia Britannica. 2007. Retrieved 31 December 2007.
Sydney E. Ahlstrom, characterized denominationalism in America as "a virtual ecclesiology" that "first of all repudiates the insistences of the Catholic Church, the churches of the 'magisterial' Reformation, and of most sects that they alone are the true Church." (Ahlstrom, Sydney E.; Hall, David D. (2004). A Religious History of the American People (Revised ed.). Yale University Press. p. 381. ISBN 978-0-300-10012-9.);
Nash, Donald A. Why the Churches of Christ are Not a Denomination (PDF). pp. 1–3. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 January 2010. Retrieved 17 June 2014.;
Wendell Winkler, Christ's Church is not a Denomination;
David E. Pratte (1999). "Jesus Is Lord Free Online Bible Study Course Lesson 8, II. How Did Modern Denominations Begin?". biblestudylessons.com. Retrieved 17 June 2014.
Second Vatican Council, Lumen Gentium Archived 6 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine..
Duffy, Saints and Sinners, p. 1.
Hitchcock, Geography of Religion, p. 281.
Norman, The Roman Catholic Church an Illustrated History, p. 11, 14.
Second Vatican Council, Lumen Gentium Archived 6 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine., chapter 2, paragraph 15.
Catechism of the Catholic Church, paragraph 865. Archived 12 August 2015 at the Wayback Machine.
Marthaler, Introducing the Catechism of the Catholic Church, Traditional Themes and Contemporary Issues (1994), preface.
John Paul II, Pope (1997). "Laetamur Magnopere". Vatican. Archived from the original on 11 February 2008. Retrieved 9 March 2008.
Annuario Pontificio (2012), p. 1142.
Barry, One Faith, One Lord (2001), p. 71
Central Intelligence Agency, CIA World Factbook (2007).
Adherents.com, Religions by Adherents
Zenit.org, "Number of Catholics and Priests Rises Archived 25 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine.", 12 February 2007.
Cross/Livingstone. The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church, p. 1199.
Fairchild, Mary. "Christianity:Basics:Eastern Orthodox Church Denomination". about.com. Retrieved 22 May 2014.
"Oriental Orthodox Churches". Wcc-coe.org. Archived from the original on 6 April 2010. Retrieved 19 November 2010.
"An Introduction to the Oriental Orthodox Churches". Pluralism.org. 15 March 2005. Retrieved 19 November 2010.
OONS. "Syrian Orthodox Resources – Middle Eastern Oriental Orthodox Common Declaration". Sor.cua.edu. Retrieved 19 November 2010.
McManners, Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity. pp. 251–59.
"About The Methodist Church". Methodist Central Hall Westminster. Archived from the original on 21 January 2007. Retrieved 31 December 2007.
"Christianity: Pentecostal Churches". GodPreach, Inc. Archived from the original on 11 February 2015. Retrieved 31 December 2007.
"Statement of Belief". Cambridge Christ United Methodist Church. Archived from the original on 28 September 2007. Retrieved 31 December 2007.
"The New Birth by John Wesley (Sermon 45)". The United Methodist Church GBGM. Archived from the original on 13 September 2007. Retrieved 31 December 2007.
"God's Preparing, Accepting, and Sustaining Grace". The United Methodist Church GBGM. Archived from the original on 9 January 2008. Retrieved 31 December 2007.
"Total Experience of the Spirit". Warren Wilson College. Archived from the original on 3 September 2006. Retrieved 31 December 2007.
This branch was first called Calvinism by Lutherans who opposed it, and many within the tradition would prefer to use the word Reformed. It includes Presbyterians and Congregationalists.
World Council of Churches: Evangelical churches: "Evangelical churches have grown exponentially in the second half of the 20th century and continue to show great vitality, especially in the global South. This resurgence may in part be explained by the phenomenal growth of Pentecostalism and the emergence of the charismatic movement, which are closely associated with evangelicalism. However, there can be no doubt that the evangelical tradition "per se" has become one of the major components of world Christianity. Evangelicals also constitute sizable minorities in the traditional Protestant and Anglican churches. In regions like Africa and Latin America, the boundaries between "evangelical" and "mainline" are rapidly changing and giving way to new ecclesial realities."
Sykes/Booty/Knight. The Study of Anglicanism, p. 219.
Gregory Hallam, Orthodoxy and Ecumenism.
Gregory Mathewes-Green, "Whither the Branch Theory?", Anglican Orthodox Pilgrim Vol. 2, No. 4. Archived 19 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine.
Benedetto, Robert; Duke, James O. (2008). The New Westminster Dictionary of Church History. Westminster John Knox Press. p. 22. ISBN 9780664224165.
Littell, Franklin H. (2000). The Anabaptist View of the Church. The Baptist Standard Bearer, Inc. p. 79. ISBN 9781579788360. In reviewing the records, the reader is struck with the Anabaptists' acute consciousness of separation from the "fallen" church — in which they included the Reformers as well as the Roman institution. Some writers have therefore concluded that Anabaptism is not merely a variant form of Protestantism, but rather an ideology and practice quite different in kind from those of both Rome and the Reformers.
"Who We Are: A Quick Visual Guide". Mennonite Church USA. 2018. Retrieved 26 April 2018. Anabaptists: We are neither Catholic nor Protestant, but we share ties to those streams of Christianity. We cooperate as a sign of our unity in Christ and in ways that extend the reign of God’s Kingdom on earth. We are known as “Anabaptists” (not anti-Baptist) — meaning “rebaptizers.”
Confessionalism is a term employed by historians to refer to "the creation of fixed identities and systems of beliefs for separate churches which had previously been more fluid in their self-understanding, and which had not begun by seeking separate identities for themselves—they had wanted to be truly Catholic and reformed." (MacCulloch, The Reformation: A History, p. xxiv.)
"Classification of Protestant Denominations" (PDF). Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life / U.S. Religious Landscape Survey. Retrieved 27 September 2009.
McManners, Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity, p. 91f.
"The Restorationist Movements". Religious Tolerance. Retrieved 31 December 2007.
"LDS Statistics and Church Facts | Total Church Membership". www.mormonnewsroom.org. Retrieved 2018-04-27.
Sydney E. Ahlstrom, A Religious History of the American People (2004)
Melton's Encyclopedia of American Religions (2009)
Fahlbusch, Erwin (14 February 2008). The Encyclodedia of Christianity. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 208. ISBN 9780802824172.
Fleming, John A.; Rowan, Michael J.; Chambers, James Albert (2004). Folk Furniture of Canada's Doukhobors, Hutterites, Mennonites and Ukrainians. University of Alberta. p. 4. ISBN 9780888644183. The English Quakers, who had made contact with the Doukhobors earlier, as well as the Philadelphia Society of Friends, also determined to help with their emigration from Russia to some other country--the only action which seemed possible.
Ariel, Yaakov (2006). "Judaism and Christianity Unite! The Unique Culture of Messianic Judaism". In Gallagher, Eugene V.; Ashcraft, W. Michael. Jewish and Christian Traditions. Introduction to New and Alternative Religions in America. 2. Westport, Conn: Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 208. ISBN 978-0-275-98714-5. LCCN 2006022954. OCLC 315689134. Retrieved September 9, 2015. For example, Messianic Jews, without exception, believe that the way to eternal life is through the acceptance of Jesus as one's personal savior and that no obedience to the Jewish law or "works" is necessary in order to obtain that goal.…Remarkably, it has been exactly this adherence to the basic Christian evangelical faith that has allowed Messianic Jews to adopt and promote Jewish rites and customs. They are Christians in good standing and can retain whatever cultural attributes and rites they choose.
Western Esotericism and the Science of Religion: Selected Papers Presented at the 17th Congress
Besant, Annie (2001). Esoteric Christianity or the Lesser Mysteries. City: Adamant Media Corporation. ISBN 978-1-4021-0029-1.
From the Greek ἐσωτερικός (esôterikos, "inner"). The term esotericism itself was coined in the 17th century. (Oxford English Dictionary Compact Edition, Volume 1, Oxford University Press, 1971, p. 894.)
Wouter J. Hanegraaff, Antoine Faivre, Roelof van den Broek, Jean-Pierre Brach, Dictionary of Gnosis & Western Esotericism, Brill 2005.
"Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary: esotericism". Webster.com. 13 August 2010. Retrieved 19 November 2010.
"Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary: esoteric". Webster.com. Retrieved 19 November 2010.
Dawson, Christopher; Glenn Olsen (1961). Crisis in Western Education (reprint ed.). p. 108. ISBN 9780813216836.
Koch, Carl (1994). The Catholic Church: Journey, Wisdom, and Mission. Early Middle Ages: St. Mary's Press. ISBN 978-0-88489-298-4.
Koch, Carl (1994). The Catholic Church: Journey, Wisdom, and Mission. The Age of Enlightenment: St. Mary's Press. ISBN 978-0-88489-298-4.
Dawson, Christopher; Olsen, Glenn (1961). Crisis in Western Education (reprint ed.). ISBN 978-0-8132-1683-6.
Encyclopædia Britannica Forms of Christian education
Hough, Susan Elizabeth (2007), Richter's Scale: Measure of an Earthquake, Measure of a Man, Princeton University Press, p. 68, ISBN 0-691-12807-3
Woods 2005, p. 109.
Encyclopædia Britannica Jesuit
Wallace, William A. (1984). Prelude, Galileo and his Sources. The Heritage of the Collegio Romano in Galileo's Science. N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Sztompka, 2003
Encyclopædia Britannica Church and social welfare
Encyclopædia Britannica Care for the sick
Encyclopædia Britannica Property, poverty, and the poor,
Weber, Max (1905). The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism.
Encyclopædia Britannica Church and state
Sir Banister Fletcher, History of Architecture on the Comparative Method.
Buringh, Eltjo; van Zanden, Jan Luiten: "Charting the 'Rise of the West': Manuscripts and Printed Books in Europe, A Long-Term Perspective from the Sixth through Eighteenth Centuries", The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 69, No. 2 (2009), pp. 409–445 (416, table 1)
Eveleigh, Bogs (2002). Baths and Basins: The Story of Domestic Sanitation. Stroud, England: Sutton.
Henry Gariepy (2009). Christianity in Action: The History of the International Salvation Army. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 16. ISBN 978-0-8028-4841-3.
Encyclopædia Britannica The tendency to spiritualize and individualize marriage
Hill, Donald. Islamic Science and Engineering. 1993. Edinburgh Univ. Press. ISBN 0-7486-0455-3, p.4
Brague, Rémi (15 April 2009). The Legend of the Middle Ages. p. 164. ISBN 978-0-226-07080-3.
Kitty Ferguson (2011). Pythagoras: His Lives and the Legacy of a Rational Universe. Icon Books Limited. p. 100. ISBN 978-1-84831-250-0. It was in the Near and Middle East and North Africa that the old traditions of teaching and learning continued, and where Christian scholars were carefully preserving ancient texts and knowledge of the ancient Greek language
Kaser, Karl (2011). The Balkans and the Near East: Introduction to a Shared History. LIT Verlag Münster. p. 135. ISBN 978-3-643-50190-5.
Rémi Brague, Assyrians contributions to the Islamic civilization
Britannica, Nestorian
Hyman and Walsh Philosophy in the Middle Ages Indianapolis, 1973, p. 204' Meri, Josef W. and Jere L. Bacharach, Editors, Medieval Islamic Civilization Vol.1, A-K, Index, 2006, p. 304.
"Religion of History's 100 Most Influential People".
"Religion of Great Philosophers".
"Christian Influences In The Sciences". rae.org. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015.
"World's Greatest Creation Scientists from Y1K to Y2K". creationsafaris.com. Archived from the original on 15 January 2016.
"100 Scientists Who Shaped World History".
"50 Nobel Laureates and Other Great Scientists Who Believe in God". Many well-known historical figures who influenced Western science considered themselves Christian such as Nicolaus Copernicus, Galileo Galilei, Johannes Kepler, Isaac Newton, Robert Boyle, Alessandro Volta, Michael Faraday, William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin and James Clerk Maxwell.
"Religious Affiliation of the World's Greatest Artists".
Hall, p. 100.
"Wealthy 100 and the 100 Most Influential in Business".
Baruch A. Shalev, 100 Years of Nobel Prizes (2003), Atlantic Publishers & Distributors, p.57: between 1901 and 2000 reveals that 654 Laureates belong to 28 different religions. Most (65.4%) have identified Christianity in its various forms as their religious preference. ISBN 978-0935047370
G.C. Oosthuizen. Postchristianity in Africa. C Hurst & Co Publishers Ltd (31 December 1968). ISBN 0-903983-05-2
McManners, Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity, pp. 581–84.
McManners, Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity. p. 413f.
McManners, Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity, p. 498.
The Oxford companion to Christian thought. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2000. p. 694. ISBN 978-0-19-860024-4.
Oxford, "Encyclopedia Of Christianity, pg. 307.
McManners, Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity, p. 373.
McManners, Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity, p. 583.
"Methodist Statement" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 January 2010. Retrieved 19 November 2010.
International Standard Bible Encyclopedia: E-J by Geoffrey W. Bromiley 1982 ISBN 0-8028-3782-4 page 175
Jews and Christians: The Parting of the Ways, A.D. 70 to 135 by James D. G. Dunn 1999 ISBN 0-8028-4498-7 pages 112–113
Asher Norman Twenty-six Reasons why Jews Don't Believe in Jesus Feldheim Publishers 2007 ISBN 978-0-977-19370-7 page 11
Keith Akers The Lost Religion of Jesus: Simple Living and Nonviolence in Early Christianity Lantern Books 2000 ISBN 978-1-930-05126-3 page 103
Ferguson, Everett (1993). Backgrounds of Early Christianity (second ed.). Grand Rapids, Michigan: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company. pp. 562–564. ISBN 0-8028-0669-4.
Olson, Roger E. (1999), The Story of Christian Theology: Twenty Centuries of Tradition & Reform, Downers Grove, Illinois: InterVarsity Press, p. 101, ISBN 978-0-8308-1505-0
Ferguson, Everett (1993). Backgrounds of Early Christianity (second ed.). Grand Rapids, Michigan: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company. pp. 556–561. ISBN 0-8028-0669-4.
Sherwin-White, A. N. (April 1964). "Why Were the Early Christians Persecuted? -- An Amendment". Past and Present (27): 23–27. doi:10.1093/past/27.1.23. JSTOR 649759.
The Encyclopedia of Christian Literature, Volume 1 by George Thomas Kurian and James Smith 2010 ISBN 0-8108-6987-X page 527
Apologetic Discourse and the Scribal Tradition by Wayne Campbell Kannaday 2005 ISBN 90-04-13085-3 pages 32–33
A Dictionary Of Jewish-Christian Relations by Edward Kessler, Neil Wenborn 2005 ISBN 0-521-82692-6 page 168
The Cambridge Companion to Nietzsche by Bernd Magnus, Kathleen Marie Higgins 1996 ISBN 0-521-36767-0 pages 90–93
Russell on Religion: Selections from the Writings of Bertrand Russell by Bertrand Russell, Stefan Andersson and Louis Greenspan 1999 ISBN 0-415-18091-0 pages 77–87
Christianity: An Introduction by Alister E. McGrath 2006 ISBN 1-4051-0899-1 pp. 125–126.
" The Christ Myth Theory and its Problems ", published 2011 by American Atheist press, Cranford, New Jersey, ISBN 1-57884-017-1
Dulles, Avery Robert Cardinal (2005). A History of Apologetics. San Francisco: Ignatius Press. p. 120. ISBN 0-89870-933-4.
L Russ Bush, ed. (1983). Classical Readings in Christian Apologetics. Grand Rapids: Zondervan. p. 275. ISBN 0-310-45641-X.
(http://www.chesterton.org/why-i-believe-in-christianity/)
Hauser, Chris (History major, Dartmouth College class of 2014) (Fall 2011). "Faith and Paradox: G.K. Chesterton's Philosophy of Christian Paradox". The Dartmouth Apologia: A Journal of Christian Thought. 6 (1): 16–20. Retrieved 29 March 2015.
"Christianity". 6 December 2010.
Howson, Colin (28 July 2011). Objecting to God. Cambridge University Press. p. 92. ISBN 9781139498562. Nor is the agreement coincidental, according to a substantial constituency of religious apologists, who regard the inflationary Big Bang model as direct evidence for God. John Lennox, a mathematician at the University of Oxford, tells us that 'even if the non-believers don't like it, the Big Bang fits in exactly with the Christian narrative of creation'. ... William Lane Craig is another who claims that the Biblical account is corroborated by Big Bang cosmology. Lane Craig also claims that there is a prior proof that there is a God who created this universe.
Bibliography
Albright, William F. From the Stone Age to Christianity.
Alexander, T. Desmond. New Dictionary of Biblical Theology.
Bahnsen, Greg. A Reformed Confession Regarding Hermeneutics (article 6).
Ball, Bryan; Johnsson, William (ed.). The Essential Jesus. Pacific Press (2002). ISBN 0-8163-1929-4.
Barrett, David; Kurian, Tom and others. (ed.). World Christian Encyclopedia. Oxford University Press (2001).
Barry, John F. One Faith, One Lord: A Study of Basic Catholic Belief. William H. Sadlier (2001). ISBN 0-8215-2207-8
Benton, John. Is Christianity True? Darlington, Eng.: Evangelical Press (1988). ISBN 0-85234-260-8
Bettenson, Henry (ed.). Documents of the Christian Church. Oxford University Press (1943).
Bokenkotter, Thomas (2004). A Concise History of the Catholic Church. Doubleday. ISBN 0-385-50584-1.
Browning, Robert (1992). The Byzantine Empire. Washington, DC: The Catholic University of America Press. ISBN 0-8132-0754-1.
Bruce, F.F. The Canon of Scripture.
Cameron, Averil (2006). The Byzantines. Oxford: Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-4051-9833-2.
Chambers, Mortimer; Crew, Herlihy, Rabb, Woloch. The Western Experience. Volume II: The Early Modern Period. Alfred A. Knopf (1974). ISBN 0-394-31734-3.
Coffey, John. Persecution and Toleration in Protestant England 1558–1689. Pearson Education (2000).
Cross, F. L.; Livingstone, E. A. (ed.). The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church. Oxford University Press (1997). ISBN 0-19-211655-X.
Deppermann, Klaus. Melchior Hoffman: Social Unrest and Apocalyptic Vision in the Age of Reformation. ISBN 0-567-08654-2.
Dilasser, Maurice. The Symbols of the Church. Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press (1999). ISBN 0-8146-2538-X
Duffy, Eamon. Saints and Sinners, a History of the Popes. Yale University Press (1997). ISBN 0-300-07332-1
Elwell, Walter A.; Comfort, Philip Wesley. Tyndale Bible Dictionary, Tyndale House Publishers (2001). ISBN 0-8423-7089-7.
Esler, Philip F. The Early Christian World. Routledge (2004).
Farrar, F.W. Mercy and Judgment. A Few Last Words On Christian Eschatology With Reference to Dr. Pusey's, "What Is Of Faith?". Macmillan, London/New York (1904).
Ferguson, Sinclair; Wright, David, eds. New Dictionary of Theology. consulting ed. Packer, James. Leicester: Inter-Varsity Press (1988). ISBN 0-85110-636-6
Foutz, Scott. Martin Luther and Scripture Martin Luther and Scripture.
Fowler, Jeaneane D. World Religions: An Introduction for Students, Sussex Academic Press (1997). ISBN 1-898723-48-6.
Fuller, Reginald H. The Foundations of New Testament Christology Scribners (1965). ISBN 0-684-15532-X.
Froehle, Bryan; Gautier, Mary, Global Catholicism, Portrait of a World Church, Orbis books; Center for Applied Research in the Apostolate, Georgetown University (2003) ISBN 1-57075-375-X
Funk, Robert. The Acts of Jesus: What Did Jesus Really Do?. Polebridge Press (1998). ISBN 0-06-062978-9.
Glenny, W. Edward. Typology: A Summary Of The Present Evangelical Discussion.
Gonzalez, Justo L. The Story of Christianity: The Early Church to the Dawn of the Reformation, Harper Collins Publishers, New York (1984).
Hanegraaff, Hank. Resurrection: The Capstone in the Arch of Christianity. Thomas Nelson (2000). ISBN 0-8499-1643-7.
Harnack, Adolf von. History of Dogma (1894).
Hickman, Hoyt L. and others. Handbook of the Christian Year. Abingdon Press (1986). ISBN 0-687-16575-X
Hinnells, John R. The Routledge Companion to the Study of Religion (2005).
Hitchcock, Susan Tyler. Geography of Religion. National Geographic Society (2004) ISBN 0-7922-7313-3
Kelly, J.N.D. Early Christian Doctrines.
Kelly, J.N.D. The Athanasian Creed. Harper & Row, New York (1964).
Kirsch, Jonathan. God Against the Gods.
Kreeft, Peter. Catholic Christianity. Ignatius Press (2001) ISBN 0-89870-798-6
Letham, Robert. The Holy Trinity in Scripture, History, Theology, and Worship. P & R Publishing (2005). ISBN 0-87552-000-6.
Lorenzen, Thorwald. Resurrection, Discipleship, Justice: Affirming the Resurrection Jesus Christ Today. Smyth & Helwys (2003). ISBN 1-57312-399-4.
McLaughlin, R. Emmet, Caspar Schwenckfeld, reluctant radical: his life to 1540, New Haven: Yale University Press (1986). ISBN 0-300-03367-2.
MacCulloch, Diarmaid, The Reformation: A History. Viking Adult (2004).
MacCulloch, Diarmaid, A History of Christianity: The First Three Thousand Years. London, Allen Lane. 2009. ISBN 978-0-7139-9869-6
Marber, Peter. Money Changes Everything: How Global Prosperity Is Reshaping Our Needs, Values and Lifestyles. FT Press (2003). ISBN 0-13-065480-9
Marthaler, Berard. Introducing the Catechism of the Catholic Church, Traditional Themes and Contemporary Issues. Paulist Press (1994). ISBN 0-8091-3495-0
Mathison, Keith. The Shape of Sola Scriptura (2001).
McClintock, John, Cyclopaedia of Biblical, Theological, and Ecclesiastical Literature. Harper &Brothers, original from Harvard University (1889)
McGrath, Alister E. Christianity: An Introduction. Blackwell Publishing (2006). ISBN 1-4051-0899-1.
McGrath, Alister E. Historical Theology.
McManners, John. Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity. Oxford University Press (1990). ISBN 0-19-822928-3.
Meconi, David Vincent. "Pagan Monotheism in Late Antiquity", in: Journal of Early Christian Studies.
Metzger, Bruce M., Michael Coogan (ed.). Oxford Companion to the Bible. Oxford University Press (1993). ISBN 0-19-504645-5.
Mullin, Robert Bruce. A short world history of Christianity. Westminster John Knox Press (2008).
Norman, Edward. The Roman Catholic Church, An Illustrated History. University of California (2007) ISBN 978-0-520-25251-6
Olson, Roger E., The Mosaic of Christian Belief. InterVarsity Press (2002). ISBN 978-0-8308-2695-7.
Orlandis, Jose, A Short History of the Catholic Church. Scepter Publishers (1993) ISBN 1-85182-125-2
Ott, Ludwig. Grundriß der Dogmatik. Herder, Freiburg (1965).
Otten, Herman J. Baal or God? Liberalism or Christianity, Fantasy vs. Truth: Beliefs and Practices of the Churches of the World Today.... Second ed. New Haven, Mo.: Lutheran News, 1988.
Pelikan, Jaroslav; Hotchkiss, Valerie (ed.) Creeds and Confessions of Faith in the Christian Tradition. Yale University Press (2003). ISBN 0-300-09389-6.
Putnam, Robert D. Democracies in Flux: The Evolution of Social Capital in Contemporary Society. Oxford University Press (2002).
Riley-Smith, Jonathan. The Oxford History of the Crusades. New York: Oxford University Press, (1999).
Robinson, George (2000). Essential Judaism: A Complete Guide to Beliefs, Customs and Rituals. New York: Pocket Books. ISBN 978-0-671-03481-8.
Schama, Simon . A History of Britain. Hyperion (2000). ISBN 0-7868-6675-6.
Servetus, Michael. Restoration of Christianity. Lewiston, New York: Edwin Mellen Press (2007).
Simon, Edith. Great Ages of Man: The Reformation. Time-Life Books (1966). ISBN 0-662-27820-8.
Smith, J.Z. (1998).
Spitz, Lewis. The Protestant Reformation. Concordia Publishing House (2003). ISBN 0-570-03320-9.
Sproul, R.C. Knowing Scripture.
Spurgeon, Charles. A Defense of Calvinism.
Sykes, Stephen; Booty, John; Knight, Jonathan. The Study of Anglicanism. Augsburg Fortress Publishers (1998). ISBN 0-8006-3151-X.
Talbott, Thomas. Three Pictures of God in Western Theology" (1995).
Ustorf, Werner. "A missiological postscript", in: McLeod, Hugh; Ustorf, Werner (ed.). The Decline of Christendom in Western Europe, 1750–2000. Cambridge University Press (2003).
Walsh, Chad. Campus Gods on Trial. Rev. and enl. ed. New York: Macmillan Co., 1962, t.p. 1964. xiv, [4], 154 p.
Woodhead, Linda. An Introduction to Christianity.
Woods, Thomas E. (2005). How the Catholic Church Built Western Civilization. Washington, DC: Regnery.
Further reading
Gill, Robin (2001). The Cambridge companion to Christian ethics. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-77918-9.
Gunton, Colin E. (1997). The Cambridge companion to Christian doctrine. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-47695-X.
MacCulloch, Diarmaid. Christianity: The First Three Thousand Years (Viking; 2010) 1,161 pages; survey by leading historian
MacMullen, Ramsay (2006). Voting About God in Early Church Councils. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-11596-2.
Padgett, Alan G.; Sally Bruyneel (2003). Introducing Christianity. Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books. ISBN 1-57075-395-4.
Price, Matthew Arlen; Collins, Michael (1999). The story of Christianity. New York: Dorling Kindersley. ISBN 0-7513-0467-0.
Ratzinger, Joseph (2004). Introduction To Christianity (Communio Books). San Francisco: Ignatius Press. ISBN 1-58617-029-5.
Roper, J.C., Bp. (1923), et al.. Faith in God, in series, Layman's Library of Practical Religion, Church of England in Canada, vol. 2. Toronto, Ont.: Musson Book Co. N.B.: The series statement is given in the more extended form which appears on the book's front cover.
Tucker, Karen; Wainwright, Geoffrey (2006). The Oxford history of Christian worship. Oxford [Oxfordshire]: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-513886-4.
Wagner, Richard (2004). Christianity for Dummies. For Dummies. ISBN 0-7645-4482-9.
Webb, Jeffrey B. (2004). The Complete Idiot's Guide to Christianity. Indianapolis, Ind: Alpha Books. ISBN 1-59257-176-X.
Wills, Garry, "A Wild and Indecent Book" (review of David Bentley Hart, The New Testament: A Translation, Yale University Press, 577 pp.), The New York Review of Books, vol. LXV, no. 2 (8 February 2018), pp. 34–35. Discusses some pitfalls in interpreting and translating the New Testament.
Woodhead, Linda (2004). Christianity: a very short introduction. Oxford [Oxfordshire]: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-280322-0.
External links
Christianity at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
"Christianity". Encyclopædia Britannica
Religion & Ethics – Christianity A number of introductory articles on Christianity from the BBC
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Christianity&oldid=838561550"
This page was last edited on 27 April 2018, at 20:16.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Jerusalem in Christianity
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For Christians, Jerusalem's role in first century Christianity, during the ministry of Jesus and the Apostolic Age, as recorded in the New Testament, gives it great importance, in addition to its role in the Old Testament, the Hebrew Bible.[1]

Contents
1	Jerusalem in the New Testament and early Christianity
2	Medieval traditions
3	Jerusalem in the Old Testament
4	Jerusalem as an allegory for the Church
5	See also
6	References
7	External links
Jerusalem in the New Testament and early Christianity
According to the New Testament, Jerusalem was the city to which Jesus was brought as a child, to be presented at the Temple (Luke 2:22) and to attend festivals (Luke 2:41). According to the Canonical gospels, Jesus preached and healed in Jerusalem, especially in the Temple Courts. Jerusalem historian Dan Mazar reported in a series of articles in the Jerusalem Christian Review on the archaeological discoveries made at this location by his grandfather, Professor Benjamin Mazar, which included the 1st century stairs of ascent, where Jesus and his disciples preached, as well as the "mikvaot" (or baptismals) used by both Jewish and Christian pilgrims. The events of Pentecost, which are recorded in the New Testament Book of Acts, also took place at this location. There is also an account of Jesus' cleansing of the Temple at the Temple Court, chasing various traders out of the sacred precincts (Mark 11:15, see also Mark 11). Much of this area was also uncovered by the excavations conducted by the elder Mazar. At the end of each of the Gospels, there are accounts of Jesus' Last Supper in an "Upper Room" in Jerusalem, his arrest in Gethsemane, his trial, his crucifixion at Golgotha, his burial nearby and his resurrection and ascension and prophecy to return.


The Cenacle on Mount Zion, claimed to be the location of the Last Supper and Pentecost. Bargil Pixner[2] claims the original Church of the Apostles is located under the current structure.

Main entrance to the Church of the Holy Sepulchre.
Tradition holds that the place of the Last Supper is the Cenacle, on the second floor of a building on Mount Zion where David's Tomb is reportedly on the first floor. Archaeologist Bargil Pixner[2] claims to have found three walls of the original structure still extant today. The place of Jesus' anguished prayer and betrayal, Gethsemane, is probably somewhere near the Church of All Nations on the Mount of Olives. Jesus' trial before Pontius Pilate may have taken place at the Antonia Fortress, to the north of the Temple area. Popularly, the exterior pavement where the trial was conducted is beneath the Convent of the Sisters of Zion. Other Christians believe that Pilate tried Jesus at Herod's Palace on Mount Zion.

The Via Dolorosa, or way of suffering, is the traditional route to Golgotha, the place of crucifixion, and is an important pilgrimage. The route ends at the Church of the Holy Sepulchre (perhaps the most holy place for Christians). The Holy Sepulchre is traditionally believed to be the location of Golgotha and Jesus' nearby tomb. The original church was built in 336 by Constantine I. The Garden Tomb is a popular pilgrimage site near the Damascus Gate. It was suggested by Charles George Gordon that this site, rather than the Holy Sepulchre, is the true place of Golgotha.


The Church of All Nations near the Mount of Olives.
The Acts of the Apostles and Pauline Epistles show James the Just, the brother of Jesus, as leader of the early Jerusalem church. He and his successors were the focus for Jewish Christians until the destruction of the city by Emperor Hadrian in 135.[3] The exclusion of Jews from the new city of Aelia Capitolina meant that gentile bishops were appointed under the authority of the Metropolitans of Caesarea and, ultimately, the Patriarchs of Antioch. The general significance of Jerusalem to Christians outside the Holy Land entered a period of decline during the Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire but resumed again c.325 when Emperor Constantine I and his mother, Helena, endowed Jerusalem with churches and shrines, making it the foremost centre of Christian pilgrimage, see also Constantine I and Christianity. Helena is remembered as the Patron Saint of Archaeologists and (according to the church historian Socrates of Constantinople[4]) claimed to have found (with the assistance of Bishop Macarius of Jerusalem) the Cross of Christ, after removing a Temple to Venus that had been built over the site. Jerusalem received special recognition in Canon VII of Nicaea in 325, without yet becoming a metropolitan see.[5] The traditional founding date for the Brotherhood of the Holy Sepulchre (which guards the Christian Holy places in the Holy Land) is 313 which corresponds with the date of the Edict of Milan which legalized Christianity in the Roman Empire. The Council of Chalcedon in 451 raised the Bishop of Jerusalem to the rank of patriarch, together with Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria and Antioch, forming the Pentarchy. However, Byzantine politics meant that Jerusalem simply passed from the Syrian jurisdiction of Antioch to the Greek authorities in Constantinople. For centuries, Greek clergy dominated the Jerusalem church. Meanwhile, the Roman church never accepted the Pentarchy and instead claimed primacy, see Papal supremacy and East–West Schism.

Medieval traditions
In 638, Sophronius, Patriarch of Jerusalem, handed over the keys of the city to Calif Umar's Muslim forces. The Muslim authorities in Jerusalem were not kind to their Christian subjects, forcing them to live a life of "discrimination, servitude and humiliation".[6] The mistreatment of Christians would only worsen as the armies of the First Crusade approached Jerusalem. Fearing that the Eastern Christians had been conspiring with approaching crusaders, the Muslim authorities of Jerusalem massacred much of the city's Christian population, seeing the fortunate escape the city in terror.[7] While the Crusaders hoped to protect Christian pilgrims who had been attacked and killed by the Turks, to protect the Christian holy places which had been destroyed by Caliph Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah, and in fact were coming in response to pleas for help from the Eastern Christian Byzantine Emperor Alexios I Komnenos, there is no evidence for any conspiracy.

On 15 July 1099, the army of the First Crusade captured Jerusalem. Most the city's population was killed, with the exception of Eastern Christians. They were, however, exiled from the city, as their new Latin rulers believed they were conspiring with the Muslims.[8] Jerusalem became the capital of a 'Latin Kingdom' with a Latin church and a Latin Patriarch, all under the authority of the Pope. The city's first Latin ruler, Godfrey de Bouillon, was elected in 1099.[9] Out of humility and deference to Jesus, he refused to be called king in a city where he thought only Jesus had the right to be called king; he would only call himself Jerusalem's protector. Throughout his short reign as protector, Godfrey struggled to increase the population of Jerusalem until his death in 1100. In 1100 he was succeeded by his brother Baldwin I who, unlike Godfrey, was willing to take the title of King of Jerusalem. With Jerusalem's population dwindling Baldwin I, as early as 1115, offered the Christians of Transjordan a section of Jerusalem. These Christians were often the target of Muslim aggression and therefore promptly accepted Baldwin's proposal.[10] In 1187, when Saladin captured the city, the Holy Sepulchre and many other churches were returned to the care of Eastern Christians.

From the 17th to the 19th century, various Catholic European nations petitioned the Ottoman Empire for Catholic control of the 'holy places'. The Franciscans are the traditional Catholic custodians of the holy places. Control swung back and forth between the western and eastern churches throughout this period. Sultan Abd-ul-Mejid I (1839–1861), perhaps out of despair, published a firman that laid out in detail the exact rights and responsibility of each community at the Holy Sepulchre. This document became known as the Status Quo, and is still the basis for the complex protocol of the shrine. The Status Quo was upheld by the British Mandate and Jordan. After the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, and the passing of the Old City into Israeli hands, the Knesset passed a law protecting the holy places. Five Christian communities currently have rights in the Holy Sepulchre: the Greek Patriarchate, Latins (Western Rite Roman Catholics), Armenians, Copts and Syriac Orthodox.

The New Jerusalem is the focus of a vision at the end of the Book of Revelation. It is The Perfect City where God lives among his people
Jerusalem in the Old Testament
In the Old Testament, Jerusalem is referred to 669 times and Zion (which usually means Jerusalem, sometimes the Land of Israel) 154 times, while Zion Gadol (large Zion) is only mentioned 11 times. The Pentateuch refers to Moriah as the location of the binding of Isaac, and 2 Chronicles 3:1 connects this to the Temple Mount in Jerusalem.
The book of Psalms, which has been frequently recited and memorized by Jews and Christians for centuries, says:
"By the rivers of Babylon we sat down and wept when we remembered Zion." (Psalms 137:1)
"For there they that carried us away captive required of us a song; and they that wasted us required of us mirth, saying, Sing us one of the songs of Zion. How shall we sing the LORD's song in a strange land? If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning . If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy. Remember, O LORD, the children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem; who said, Rase it, rase it, even to the foundation thereof; O daughter of Babylon, that art to be destroyed; happy shall he be, that repayeth thee as thou hast served us." (Psalms 137:3–8) (King James Version, with italics for words not in the original Hebrew)
"O God, the nations have entered into your inheritance, they have defiled the sanctuary of your holiness, they have turned Jerusalem into heaps of rubble...they have shed their blood like water round Jerusalem..." (Psalms 79:1–3);
"...O Jerusalem, the built up Jerusalem is like a city that is united together...Pray for the peace of Jerusalem..." (Psalms 122:2–6);
"Jerusalem is surrounded by mountains as God surrounds his people forever" (Psalms 125:3);
"The builder of Jerusalem is God, the outcast of Israel he will gather in...Praise God O Jerusalem, laud your God O Zion." (Psalms 147:2–12)
Jerusalem as an allegory for the Church
In Christianity, Jerusalem is sometimes interpreted as an allegory or type for the Church of Christ. There is a vast apocalyptic tradition that focuses on the heavenly Jerusalem instead of the literal and historical city of Jerusalem. Christians have not controlled the actual city of Jerusalem since the time of the Crusades (except for a brief period in the immediate aftermath of the 1917 Battle of Jerusalem) and have mostly relied on biblical symbols and metaphors that describe the Church as if it were the true living Jerusalem. This view is notably advocated in Augustine's City of God, a popular 5th-century Christian book that was written during the fall of the Western Roman Empire.
See also
Christian Zionism
Christian–Jewish reconciliation
Jerusalem in Judaism
Jerusalem in Islam
Jesus Trail
New Jerusalem
References
Catholic Encyclopedia: Jerusalem (Before A.D. 71): III. HISTORY D. Under the Roman Domination; until A.D. 70: "Under the administration of Pontius Pilate, Jesus Christ was arrested and put to death. The Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension of the Divine Saviour have rendered Jerusalem -- which was already glorious -- the most celebrated city in all the world. The enthusiasm with which, after the Day of Pentecost, thousands of Jews declared themselves disciples of Jesus Christ provoked a violent persecution of Christians, in which the deacon Stephen was the first martyr (Acts 6: 8–15)."
Bargil Pixner, The Church of the Apostles found on Mount Zion, Biblical Archaeology Review 16.3 May/June 1990 [1]
See: Jonathan Bourgel, "'If I forget you, Jerusalem...': The Jewish Christians' Relationship to the Destroyed Temple Following the Great Revolt", in: From One Identity to Another: The Mother Church of Jerusalem Between the Two Jewish Revolts Against Rome (66-135/6 EC), Paris: Éditions du Cerf, collection Judaïsme ancien et Christianisme primitive, (French), pp. 49-79.
Socrates' Church History at CCEL.org: Book I, Chapter XVII: The Emperor’s Mother Helena having come to Jerusalem, searches for and finds the Cross of Christ, and builds a Church.
Schaff's Seven Ecumenical Councils: First Nicaea: Canon VII: "Since custom and ancient tradition have prevailed that the Bishop of Aelia [i.e., Jerusalem] should be honoured, let him, saving its due dignity to the Metropolis, have the next place of honour."; "It is very hard to determine just what was the "precedence" granted to the Bishop of Aelia, nor is it clear which is the metropolis referred to in the last clause. Most writers, including Hefele, Balsamon, Aristenus and Beveridge consider it to be Cæsarea; while Zonaras thinks Jerusalem to be intended, a view recently adopted and defended by Fuchs; others again suppose it is Antioch that is referred to."
Prawer, Joshua. "The Settlement of the Latins in Jerusalem," Speculum 27.4 (1952): 491.
Prawer, Joshua. "The Settlement of the Latins in Jerusalem," Speculum 27.4 (1952): 492.
Prawer, Joshua. "The Settlement of the Latins in Jerusalem," Speculum 27.4 (1952): 493.
Riley-Smith, Jonathan. "The Motives of the Earliest Crusaders and the Settlement of Latin Palestine." The English Historical Review 98.398 (1983): 724.
Prawer, Joshua. "The Settlement of the Latins in Jerusalem," Speculum 27.4 (1952): 496.
External links
Catholic Encyclopedia: Jerusalem (Before A.D. 71)
Catholic Encyclopedia: Jerusalem (A.D. 71-1099)
Catholic Encyclopedia: Crusades (A.D. 1095-1270)
Catholic Encyclopedia: Jerusalem (After A.D. 1291)
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jerusalem_in_Christianity&oldid=821180493"
This page was last edited on 18 January 2018, at 21:58.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
