A share of the royalty rights to 136 Judas Priest songs including ‘Breaking The Law’, ‘Painkiller’ and ‘Living After Midnight’ are up for sale.
The rights to a portion of the tracks are being sold by K.K. Downing’s administrators after the former Judas Priest guitarist’s luxury golf resort fell into administration.
According to Billboard, the founding Judas Priest star pumped millions into the 320-acre Astbury Hall estate in Shropshire, however it was put up for sale for £10million last year with administrators citing "tougher economic times within the wider corporate hospitality market" for placing "unsustainable pressure" on the business.
FRP Advisory partners Alastair Massey and Steve Stokes were appointed as administrators over three companies related to K.K.’s ill-fated venture.
They’re now selling a share of the back-catalogue owned by Ken Downing Limited, which currently generates an estimated £250,000 to £300,000 a year in royalties.
Alastair Massey comments: “Ken Downing was a founding member of Judas Priest, and was one of the driving influences of the band’s work up to his departure in 2011.
“As part of the administration process we are selling the rights owned by Ken Downing Limited to 136 tracks, which provide a unique investment opportunity.”
After 42 years with Judas Priest, K.K. Downing quit the band in April 2011 citing "an on-going breakdown in working relationships between myself, elements of the band and management.”
In February of this year he released a statement on Facebook saying he was “shocked and stunned” that he wasn’t invited to rejoin Judas Priest when Glenn Tipton announced his retirement from touring due to the progression of Parkinson’s Disease.
Last month K.K. announced a new rock night called K.K.’s Steel Mill at Starworks Warehouse in Wolverhampton, which will showcase the finest up-and-coming and established rock and metal bands around.
K.K. said at the time: "It's with great pleasure and excitement I can confirm another new chapter in my lifelong musical journey, however this time on the other side of the crowd barriers.
"We aim to put on regular headlining shows throughout the year, and I am thrilled to announce for starters I will host American rockers Skid Row on Friday the 24th of August when Snake, Rachel, Scotti, Rob and ZP bring their hard-hitting show to the Steel Mill.
"I'm looking forward to seeing many fans at the upcoming shows enjoy the music! I'll probably see you at the bar."
We’re extremely proud to announce that Black Star Riders will headline Planet Rockstock 2018.
Following their eagerly-awaited appearance at Steelhouse Festival in Wales this summer, Ricky Warwick, Scott Gorham, Damon Johnson, Robbie Crane and Chad Szeliga will top the Planet Rockstock bill on Saturday 1st December.
Ricky Warwick previously performed at Planet Rockstock in 2016 with his other band The Fighting Hearts, however it will be Black Star Riders’ inaugural appearance at our Trecco Bay rock n’ roll weekender.
Always a formidable live force, Black Star Riders join previously confirmed headliners The Dead Daisies who will bring the festival to an emphatic close on the Sunday night (2nd December).
Alongside Black Star Riders, we can also unveil the line-up for Gold Ticket holders on the Thursday (29th November).
Having stormed last year’s event, the almighty RavenEye will headline the Thursday with Welsh rockers Hand of Dimes, blue-rock virtuoso Laurence Jones, the brilliant Lionize and one of the standout acts of Winter’s End, The Outlaw Orchestra, also on the bill.
The fresh wave of artists join a Planet Rockstock line-up that already boasts the aforementioned The Dead Daisies, Brothers Osborne, Operation: Mindcrime, Wayward Sons, Dan Patlansky, Gun, Von Hertzen Brothers, SKAM, Lazuli, Dan Baird & Homemade Sin, The Bad Flowers, Mason Hill and Those Damn Crowes.
Performing on Stage 2 this year are Austin Gold, Bigfoot, Blind Haze, Gasoline Outlaws, Gin Annie, Iconic Eye, The Kris Barras Band, Last Great Dreamers, Ragged Union, The Rising Souls, The Rocket Dolls, Voodoo Vegas and Western Sand.
Planet Rockstock 2018 once again takes place at Trecco Bay in South Wales from Friday 30th November to Sunday 2nd December.
For those wanting an extra night of live music on Thursday November 29th, Gold ticket packages are available (with four nights of accommodation and an event t-shirt included). Three-day weekend tickets are also available with accommodation (Silver and Bronze packages) and without accommodation.
Tenacious D are returning later this year with their first album since 2012’s ‘Rize of the Fenix’.
Jack Black and Kyle Gass announced their fourth studio record – tentatively titled ‘Post-Apocalyptico’ - via a crudely drawn cartoon trailer promoting their autumn 2018 North American tour, which includes a set at Foo Fighters’ festival Cal Jam.
The 40-second cartoon features the comedy duo sat on a sofa playing a video games where Jack proclaims: “F***, we gotta pay the rent.”
Kyle responds “Well, I guess we gotta make another album”, to which Jack responds “Dude, that’s gonna take us like five more years…”
We then get a tantalising snippet of music from the album as the words ‘New album 2018…. Probably / New tour 2018… Definitely’ flash on the screen.
Tenacious D last performed in the UK way back in December 2013 on the Old School Acoustic Style tour.
Jack Black was a guest on My Planet Rocks last December where he told us why Ronnie James Dio was his favourite heavy metal vocalist ever.
“They replaced Ozzy (in Black Sbabath) with who turned out to be my favourite heavy metal singer of all time, Ronnie James Dio,” Jack said.
“He held a special place as he was from the United States of America, y’know, he was one of ours. The fact that he joined forces with the greatest heavy metal band of all time was a great source of national pride for me personally.
“Also, he just had these operatic pipes; he was a very different cat, very different to Ozzy but great in a whole different way. He was singing about the devil too but more of like a dungeons and dragons magical devil than the actual terrifying satanic mass.”
Talking about meeting his hero, Jack said: “We did get to meet him, me and Kyle (Gass). We sang a song about Dio on a Tenacious D album (‘Dio’ on 2001’s ‘Tenacious D’) and he heard about it and he reached out and he said ‘hey, do you guys wanna be in a music video?’ So we did a little cameo in one of his music videos (2002’s ‘Push) and it was a thrill.”
Following Tenacious D’s appearance in the ‘Push’ video, Jack personally invited Dio to appear in his 2006 movie Tenacious D in The Pick of Destiny that also featured Dave Grohl and Meat Loaf.
The 32nd band to step into the hallowed Ones To Watch spotlight are spiky grunge purists The Kut.
The Kut are Princess Maha (vocals/guitars), Diana Bartmann (drums) and Stella Vie (bass/backing vocals).
A frenetic and fiery three-piece in the live arena, The Kut is actually the alter-ego of multi-instrumentalist lynchpin Princess Maha. Musically, the London based trio’s grungy sounds nod towards everyone from Hole to Nirvana to L7 and The Distillers, yet despite wearing their inescapable influences on their sleeves, crucially they have their own indelible, attitude-packed imprint.
A musical project since the start of the decade, the band have steadily been building up a loyal following thanks to their searing live shows and rocking anthems like ‘Mario’ and the scintillating ‘I Don’t Need Therapy’, which was lifted from their 2015 EP ‘Rock Paper Scissors’ and playlisted on Wyatt’s New Rock Show. With their career nicely simmering, last year they unleashed ‘The Kut EP’ on 500 limited edition picture discs for Record Store Day, picked up widespread plaudits in the national press and played over 50 shows in the UK.
Kicking things up a gear, The Kut started 2018 by announcing a record deal with Cargo Records and in March they premiered their massive new single ‘Mind Games’ on Kerrang! Radio. The potent anthem paved the way nicely for The Kut’s passionate and riff-heavy debut album ‘Valley of Thorns’, which was produced by James LeRock Loughrey (Skindred, Def Leppard, White Zombie) and debuted at no.7 on the UK Rock Albums Chart when it was released earlier this month. Primed to bring their sounds to the masses, The Kut are playing a series of festivals throughout the summer, their own yet-to-be-announced headline shows plus a trio of gigs with The Dead Daisies’ Marco Mendoza.
Sly Stone: 'Albino musicians could neutralise all the racial problems'
He was the musical genius who reinvented pop with the Family Stone – and threw it all away in a haze of drugs and paranoia. Now, at the age of 70, he tells Alexis Petridis in a remarkable interview about his planned comeback with an all-albino band
It is a sweltering August evening and I am perched on the edge of a bouncy castle in the grounds of a child-friendly hotel near Newquay. I'm supposed to be on holiday with my wife and kids, but instead I'm listening to Sly Stone tell me about his new idea for a band, a band he claims will be "even stronger" than the Family Stone.
This is obviously quite a boast. Between 1967 and 1975, Sly and the Family Stone not only sold millions of records, they changed the face of pop music. They were America's first major racially integrated rock band, driven by a leader who seemed to have gone out of his way to recruit not just a mixture of black and white musicians, but the biggest misfits he could find: Cynthia Robinson, a female trumpet player in an age when women didn't play the trumpet in rock bands or indeed anywhere else; Jerry Martini, a long-haired, sandal-wearing hippy saxophonist, who says he'd been "an outcast" in school for loving R'n'B instead of Dave Brubeck. "I wanted people to look onstage and see the world and how the world can get along," says Stone today. "If they could see us, see we were having fun, it might make it easier for them to catch on."
Everything about Sly and the Family Stone was spectacular. They looked spectacular – a riot of afro hair, violet wigs, satin, tassles and sequined capes. On YouTube, you can see a remarkable clip of them from the Ed Sullivan Show in December 1968, playing a medley of their hits – Everyday People, Dance to the Music, You Can Make It If You Try, I Want to Take You Higher. At the climax of the performance, Sly and his sister Rose run from the stage and dance wildly in the audience, who are largely white, middle-aged and aghast at what's going on in their midst.
They sounded spectacular, too. Their fusion of soul, funk and psychedelia was so potent and groundbreaking and successful – between 1969 and 1970, they sold 8m albums – that even Motown was forced to change its approach in their wake: out went the label's trademark sound, in came records that sounded, well, more like Sly And The Family Stone. Even their demise was spectacular. No band seemed to embody the curdling of the utopian 60s counterculture dream into paranoia and bleak, joyless hedonism quite as starkly as Sly and the Family Stone.
Advertisement
Around the time of the Ed Sullivan performance, Stone relocated from the band's base in San Francisco to a mansion in Bel Air. He surrounded himself with guns, dangerous dogs and a coterie of personal assistants and bodyguards who were, at best, highly dubious and at worst actual mafiosi. He sank ever deeper into drug use – not just cocaine, but PCP – and developed a reputation for unreliability and erratic behaviour. He still managed two more incredible albums, 1971's There's a Riot Goin' On and 1973's Fresh, but band members began leaving – bassist Larry Graham allegedly fleeing in fear for his life after an altercation with some of Stone's hired goons – and Sly and the Family Stone split up. By the end of the decade, Stone was releasing albums whose titles seemed to both acknowledge his increasingly grim reputation and smack of desperation: Back on the Right Track; Heard Ya Missed Me – Well I'm Back!
Sign up for the Sleeve Notes email: music news, bold reviews and unexpected extras
It's a remarkable story for any band to live up to, but then Stone's new idea sounds pretty remarkable too. "You know what? I'm looking for albino musicians," he says. "My feeling about it is that it could neutralise all the different racial problems." At first I think I've misheard him, which is remarkably easy to do. At 70, his voice is raspy and slightly slurred, perhaps the result of decades of hard living, or maybe something to do with a bizarre accident some years ago, when he apparently fell off a cliff in Beverly Hills while eating a plate of food: he declined to be treated for the injuries to his neck, a decision that has left him in constant pain unless he hunches over, his chin on his chest. Coupled with a patchy mobile phone signal and a bad transatlantic line, I occasionally lose the thread of what he's saying entirely. But this time I've heard him loud and clear. "To me," he continues, "albinos are the most legitimate minority group of all. All races have albinos. If we all realise that we've all got albinos in our families, it's going to take away from the ridiculous racial tension, if you're black or you're white, blah blah blah. That's why I've been trying to look for albino musicians and organise a group of people that are going to be right. That's what I've been rehearsing for. People will see us, all of us together – a real family, an albino family. People will get happy when they see that! People," he says firmly, "have got to be happy for that."
It goes without saying that I never expected to discuss albinism with one of the most elusive, fascinating and mercurial figures in rock history while sitting on a bouncy castle outside a hotel in Newquay. In fact, I never expected to speak to the former Sylvester Stewart at all, even though he has a new release to promote. Not a new album. There hasn't been one of those since 1982, unless you count the desultory CD featuring remakes of his hits that he put out a few years ago on a small independent label. Instead, there's a lavishly-packaged four-CD retrospective called Higher!, which charts his musical career from its beginning as a local radio DJ turned budding record producer in the early 60s, right up to the mid-70s.
The original plan was that I would just speak to his sister Rose, who sounds every bit as cool and insouciant on the phone as she did 42 years ago singing Runnin' Away, a song about a doomed attempt to escape fate that she performed in a blank-eyed sing-song voice, disturbingly at odds with the lyrics. She talks vaguely about the band facing "their own personal challenges" in the early 70s. "Not really deep problems," she adds, airily. And I speak to, Robinson, Martini and drummer Greg Errico, who still tour together as the Family Stone. Between them, they tell tales about the early days, when not everyone they encountered was, as Robinson puts it, "into seeing different races having fun together": "one time, me and Jerry walked by a barber shop, Jerry with his long-haired hippy look, me with my Angela Davis afro, and they ran out the store with razors. We had to run! We hadn't even said anything to them!" But the most striking thing is the awe and reverence in which they hold their former bandleader. "He's like Superman, literally," offers Robinson. "He's got x-ray vision." "He affected my life second only to God," says Martini. "Why don't people try to love him for what he did? He had so much to offer the music business and the world in general. Why is everybody concentrated on drugs or this or that?"
When the record label intimated that Stone would be willing to talk, it still seemed highly unlikely. Stone, in effect, vanished from public view in the early 80s, only cropping up in the news when he was arrested for cocaine possession or missed a court date. There was a brief flicker of activity at the end of the last decade, when he began performing live again, appearing for a few songs during shows by bands featuring various permutations of the old Family Stone lineup, with decidedly mixed results. For every night when something of the old magic fleetingly sparked, there was a disaster like the 2010 Coachella appearance, which took place just after lurid reports appeared in the press suggesting Stone was impoverished and of no fixed abode, living in a camper van parked on a street in East LA. At Coachella, Stone lay on the stage, mumbled incoherently, launched into a rant about his former manager that subsequently occasioned a lawsuit and started and stopped songs apparently at random. "It wasn't a good experience," says Errico, who played that night. "He had convinced everybody … I mean, they were looking to put together a whole tour on the other side of a successful show and … you know …" He lets out a defeated sigh. "When you have an experience like that, it's like the dark side of it … the result of the chemicals and all that. It's taken its toll and it lives right in front of you there. You don't want to go there."
The negotiations to get Stone to the phone stretch on for weeks. By the time I finally receive an LA mobile number it's long past my original deadline and into my holiday – the only place I can find a halfway decent mobile signal is in the adventure playground at the rear of the hotel. But after 12 hours of getting through to his answerphone – "You called. Or did you? We'll call back," it announces, with no option to leave a message – Stone finally picks up. Alas, he doesn't seem terribly pleased to hear from me. "I don't give a fuck what you heard, I ain't telling you anything," he says. He'll only do the interview if he's paid. "You guys send me some money, fair's fair, I work. I don't give a fuck about anything." He puts the phone down, and that appears to be that.
The next day, however, I'm given the number of someone called Neal Austinson, who describes himself as Stone's archivist/road manager, the latter a job which sounds as challenging as you might expect. "I don't know if you've seen the film Get Him to the Greek," he laughs. "A lot of similarity there. It was like those guys had followed me around, you know."
Stone, he says, is in good health and "for the most part" clean of drugs – "he likes to smoke a little weed and maybe have a cocktail before he gets onstage, but he's 70 years old, he can't do what he used to do, no one can at that age. And you know, coke is a very expensive habit to maintain." He is still resident in a camper van, albeit out of choice. "When all those stories were being published about him, he had a beautiful home near Hollywood, but he wanted to live in the camper. He likes to be able to just keep moving. Like he says, if things get weird, then he just goes somewhere else where things aren't weird. He's not destitute. He doesn't have the fortune that you would like to think a rock star would have because too many things are in litigation right now. But he pretty much gets what he wants, he lives comfortably."
He tells me that Stone has "a thousand new songs on his hard drive" and "a lot of real interesting ideas, concepts. At one point, he wanted me to find some ninja chicks to act as a security force for him. Ninja chicks and clowns. He had this idea that he would like to musically tutor the children of royalty, because he feels that's where he could make some good money." More importantly, he manages to coax Stone to the phone, abetted by the fact that his record company now appears to have paid him to speak to me. Certainly, he's in a markedly better mood than the previous day, greeting me in an English accent ("to whom am I speaking?"), upbeat about everything from his mythic reputation – "God, yeah, there's all kinds of stories about me, but it doesn't bother me, it's interesting" – to his variety of ongoing lawsuits against former managers and business associates. "I don't care about that bullshit, man. Man, that's boring. I don't even need the money that people are suing people for. I just want my tools, so I can earn money. I'd rather have that than the result of a lawsuit."
Contrary to the impression you'd get from the cameraphone footage of his Coachella appearance, he is both lucid and wryly funny, if occasionally his version of events differs markedly from everyone else's. The move from San Francisco to the Bel Air mansion, which Errico had told me flatly was "the beginning of the end", was according to Stone: "really good … beautiful. There were a lot of musicians there. It was great." Still, he concedes, there were some problems. "People told Larry that I was going to kill him. That was so far away from my head, I don't know why people would say that. It was impossible for me to even think that. Maybe they meant it as a joke. He just got a little afraid, that's all. But he's a great bass player and I figured when he realises that I'm not going to kill him" – he lets out a wheezy laugh – "he'll be back."
He talks about the Family Stone's legendary appearance at Woodstock, where by all accounts they stole the show: coming onstage at 4am, luring the audience out of their sleeping bags and on to their feet. "It was scary. More and more people kept turning up. I didn't know where to go if I wanted to buy some food," he chuckles, "although there was a lot of people advertising which kid you could go to to buy acid. So I was scared. Hey, listen, Jimi Hendrix was there, all sorts of other people. I knew my place. Just to be around Jimi Hendrix … shit. I didn't want to be running my mouth off, too much talking. I hate that kind of shit. I just wanted to play the best we could, and that's what we did."
After Woodstock, he appeared to have it all. And then, inexplicably, he started to throw it all away. The issue wasn't that his music suddenly became noticeably less commercial, although it did. By 1971's There's a Riot Goin' On, he had systematically divested his sound of its bubbling exuberance and replaced it with something profoundly creepy: the music on it is incredible, but it's redolent of stoned listlessness and small-hours paranoia, of curtains drawn to shut out the dawn – not, he insists, as some kind of despairing social comment on the fading of the hippy dream, but because of his disillusionment with the music industry. "We were in showbusiness. Once you get a hit group and once you get hit records, there are a lot of people who want a part of that. And then you get the haters. It's like a book. It needed a new chapter." Uncommercial or not, There's a Riot Goin' On went straight to No1 in the Billboard Pop Albums chart.
Although blessed with a vast audience devoted and open-minded enough to follow him down ever-more obscure musical paths, he seemed intent on alienating them, regardless. He started turning up to gigs late, or not at all, necessitating their cancellation with the audience already in the venue – in 1970, he missed 27 out of 80 shows – ruining the band's reputation in the process. Quite why is a matter of debate. Some people thought he was just suffering from a lethal combination of arrogance and being permanently out of his mind on drugs. Martini tells me that he thought Stone's behaviour was all somehow linked to the commercial failure of the band's 1967 debut album, A Whole New Thing, a notably different-sounding record to any of its successors: afterwards, his label insisted he came up with a straightforward hit, which he did, in the shape of Dance to the Music. "When he started, he started with his heart and his mind wide open and he got down right away by the powers that be in the music industry, and it kind of broke his heart. We had a lot of success, but I think it damaged Sly morally. It hurt him that he wasn't able to use his true genius to go in the direction that people like Herbie Hancock and Miles Davis did." But once again, Stone says otherwise. "Nah, I was trying to be too complex, too musical. I was trying to be Bob Dylan too. But you know, Dylan had the words and he just kept the music simple. He knew how to do that. But I'll tell you this, I knew how to do it after that album, didn't I? OK, I'll boogie down. All you've got to do is give them the music that they can hear and they can dance to, and that's what we did. Dance to the Music!"
Stone claims the missed shows weren't always his fault. The other members of the band were losing interest – "people get boyfriends and girlfriends, they start acting differently" – but "if you're the leader, you take the acclaim, you should take the blame". "Do I have any regrets?" he says. "Shit, yes, I have regrets." There's a long pause. "I just can't think of one now."
Anyway, he says, he wants to focus on the future. There's his project to recruit an albino backing band to think about. Austinson had seemed doubtful whether the thousand songs on his hard drive would ever see the light of day – "I don't think dealing with a record label and all those things are that appealing to him" – but Stone says otherwise: "I've got a few reasons why I've got to maintain stability. I've got into wanting people to hear my music. I've got something I want people to hear because I know they'll like it. They've gotta like it! The songs I've been writing are the sort of things you have to like."
I start to ask another question, but he interrupts me: "Have I talked to you enough now? I've got to go to the bathroom. You asked me about regrets," he says, with another wheezy laugh. "If I don't take a big shit now, I'll regret that." And with that, he's gone: perhaps the last of rock's great enigmatic geniuses, heading to the toilet with his mystery more or less intact.
A few days later, I speak to Neal Austinson again. He tells me that after the interview, Stone asked him to contact me again. They'd got on to the subject of his plan to become a music tutor to the children of royalty, which Stone seemed to think I might be able to assist him with. "He said, why don't you talk to that guy in England, see if he knows any royalty?" He laughs. "Just because you live over there! Sly Stone," he adds, perhaps a little unneccessarily, "he's quite the character."
Since you’re here …
… we have a small favour to ask. Unlike many news organisations, we haven’t put up a paywall – we want to keep our journalism as open as we can. More people are reading the Guardian than ever but our independent, investigative journalism takes a lot of time, money and hard work to produce. So you can see why we need to ask for your help. We do it because we believe our perspective matters – because it might well be your perspective, too.
I appreciate there not being a paywall: it is more democratic for the media to be available for all and not a commodity to be purchased by a few. I’m happy to make a contribution so others with less means still have access to information.
If everyone who reads our reporting, who likes it, helps fund it, our future would be much more secure. For as little as $1, you can support the Guardian – and it only takes a minute. Thank you.
Thom Yorke: 'If I can't enjoy this now, when do I start?'
Thom Yorke has taken time out from Radiohead for a new album made with a few famous friends. In a loose, upbeat mood, he discusses music and the internet, making Michael Stipe dance and surfing, as well as answering some of your questions
You don't necessarily associate Thom Yorke with fun. Radiohead's frontman and principal songwriter has tended to have different kinds of adjectives attached to him in his two decades in the music pages: "intense", "tortured" and "angst-ridden", or "impassioned", "essential" and "important". Though Radiohead's music has always carried a complex cathartic charge, simple pleasure, for better or worse, has never quite seemed his thing. He may have sold 30m albums, and from time to time been widely touted as the leader of "the world's biggest rock band", but along the way Yorke has generally given the appearance of a man who stands a better than average chance of being refused entry to a happy hour.
Still, sitting in a crowded cafe off Shoreditch High Street in east London, drinking morning tea, he has of late, he tells me a little anxiously, been trying on fun for size. It might be growing on him. Yorke is a slight, quick-witted presence; when he walks in there is not a flicker of recognition on the faces around us. You guess he likes it that way. He is wary of pretension, alive to all shades of irony. "I'm 44 now," he says, with a short laugh. "And I did start thinking, if I can't enjoy this now, when am I going to start?"
Some of this has to do with greater freedom. For a long while, he says, after the initial, enormous success of Radiohead, which he had started with his mates at Abingdon School aged 15, he "definitely felt trapped in the whole thing. I think we all did. Particularly after we started to have children and stuff." Yorke's two children are 10 and six. He has lived with Rachel, their mother, in Oxford since they met studying fine art at Exeter University. Those facts are clearly very important to him. "You know, making a record, going on tour is a huge commitment, particularly the way we do it, a lot of work. And when we first had young kids we were all like, Christ! Do we really want to be doing this the rest of our lives? Much as people still seemed to want us to, there were big knock-on consequences for the ones we love."
Sign up for the Sleeve Notes email: music news, bold reviews and unexpected extras
One tentative escape for Yorke from those questions was his 2006 album The Eraser, a twitchy, experimental, electronic collection of doomy dance tracks that grew out of his laptop, and which he put together with producer Nigel Godrich. He promoted it at the time with a typically defensive blog to Radiohead fans: "I want no crap about me being a traitor or whatever splitting up blah blah this was all done with their blessing," he wrote. "And I don't wanna hear that word solo."
The album contained Harrowdown Hill, his soul-searching examination of the death of Dr David Kelly, while its primary impulse, he said at the time, was anxiety about climate change. But it was in some ways at least a gesture toward liberation. In among it was a song called Atoms for Peace, once the motto of the International Atomic Energy Agency. The opening lines sounded a bit like a personal manifesto for a new kind of lightness (they were, he later claimed, something of an admonition from Rachel): "No more going to the dark side with your flying saucer eyes. No more falling down a wormhole that I have to pull you out... "
Having made the album out of loops that began in his head and ended up on his computer, Yorke became intrigued to see if it could be played live. In 2009 he gathered a band of friends together – don't say the word "supergroup" – whom he thought might be up for the challenge: Flea, the bassist of the Red Hot Chili Peppers; Joey Waronker, drummer with Beck and REM; Mauro Refosco, a Brazilian percussionist who plays with David Byrne; and Nigel Godrich, to help pull it all together. In working out how to do some of the digital bloops and beats, they spent a lot of time in the hardware store, "buying rivets and stuff". "The first time we got together was in this place in Laurel Canyon in LA," he recalls. "We did a song called The Clock and it sounded like a bomb going off, it was just amazing. The Eraser is a headphone record really, so to hear it go bang in a room was quite something for me."
The band, initially billed warily as "??????", subsequently known as Atoms for Peace, did a short American tour playing the whole of The Eraser. At the end of it, and having had "a total blast", they locked themselves in a studio for three days and started improvising some more. "I had these very small ideas," Yorke recalls, "just beats mostly. And we just played off them for about three days solid." The epic 10 hours or so of usable music they created Yorke edited down into a new album, adding lyrics and again working closely with Godrich. It's called Amok and is by turns dense, trippy, danceable and occasionally, whisper it, upbeat. Does he see it, I wonder, as coming from a different, less angry kind of emotional place to archetypal Radiohead?
He does, with caveats. "Well," he says, "when I originally wrote that 'No more going to the dark side' line, it was kind of taking the piss. And the irony is that Radiohead have just done this big world tour last year and for the most part we had the best time we have ever had. And a lot of dance music is very angry in a good way. But yes, the idea was for once in my life just to enjoy the energy of it and not want to pull it apart. Nigel was constantly on at me: 'Don't make it dark!'"
Does he think that's a permanent shift?
"No, it depends where I am, I think. Maybe literally. I've been working at home over the winter and everything I've been doing is dark as fuck. But we did a lot of this away in Los Angeles and it was sunnier. It was something to do in the afternoon and evening before you went out. There is no way I'm really going to lose the old heavy work ethic. But we got close a few times."
Ever since Radiohead's first worldwide hit single, Creep, a song that Yorke sometimes refuses to play these days but which did define a certain alienated, contrarian idea about the band and himself – "I wish I was special" and "I don't belong here" and "I'm a creep, I'm a weirdo" – he has seemed weary of the cliche it implied. In profiles, much was made of Yorke's childhood difficulties, the fact that he was born with one eye fixed shut and only subsequently half-opened by a series of failed operations. The fact that because of his father's job as a chemical salesman he moved schools frequently, was picked on because of his eye, and withdrew. The fact that, at fee-paying Abingdon, he found his refuge in the music room. One way of looking at his career has been as a sort of journey away from the limitations of that analysis. The apparent absence of introspection on Amok must come as something of a relief, I say.
He smiles from under his stubble. "To begin with, writing songs was my way of dealing with shit. Early on it was all, 'Come inside my head and look at me'," he says. "But that sort of thing doesn't seem appropriate now. Tortured often seems the only way to do things early on, but that in itself becomes tired. By the time we were doing Kid A [their fourth album, released in 2000] I didn't feel I was writing about myself at all. I was chopping up lines and pulling them out of a hat. They were emotional but they weren't anything to do with me."
In that sense, he suggests, he hopes the music became much closer to what he feels we all experience day to day: a stream of words and images coming at you from different sources that you try to make some emotional sense of. The important thing, he thought, was to be open properly to that kind of white noise. He learned the habit directly from REM's Michael Stipe, who started as a hero and has long been a friend. "Michael is still my favourite lyricist," he says. "I loved the way he would take an emotion and then take a step back from it and in doing so make it so much more powerful."
More like channelling emotion than attempting to articulate it from within?
"Something like that. I always remember one particular wild night, when we toured with REM in 1995, and I would watch him from the side of the stage," he says. "I would stand there and watch him every night, unless I was too drunk that I couldn't stand. This one night this extraordinary thing came out of him – I mean he was really out there at the time, utterly bonkers, which he will freely admit now – but it was quite something to watch someone communicate something way deeper than entertainment. It was very exciting to see."
Something not far from speaking in tongues or old-fashioned notions of prophecy?
"I'd learned about all that in art college and I was really into it, but to find someone in the music world who was so focused on that kind of experience was a huge formative thing for me. People might still say, 'What's he on about?' But that is the kind of lyric writing that matters. To me anyway."
Stipe, I say, seemed keen to take Yorke under his wing, a kind of disciple, of sorts.
Yorke laughs out loud at the idea. "I'm going to text him later and tell him you said that. He would love that. I think it was just that at the time he saw I needed a lot of help, I was struggling with it all. He is still my favourite uncle, my godfather or something. Last time I saw him I was DJing in New York and he came in wearing this white suit and just danced his arse off all night, and we said like three words to each other, had a hug and he left. But that was great, just to know he was there."
Yorke's enthusiastic DJing has become another outlet for his new-found sense of lightness. In part, it began as a bit of nostalgia for him – "I did it every Friday night when I was at college. And I started strangely missing it" – but he also enjoyed engaging with an audience without all the other pressure of playing. He uses the opportunity to explore the same kind of edges he looks for in Atoms for Peace, between digitised and live sound. "When I'm DJing I always put an afrobeat tune in between dance tracks of the same speed because it suddenly loosens everything up. Because it's more human… "
Radiohead have often riffed on the edge of that thoroughly modern disjunction. From their landmark album OK Computer on, the band seemed like evangelists for the revolutionary possibilities of a digital world, self-releasing 2007's In Rainbows on a pay-what-you-want download. Yorke is a bit more sceptical about all that now.
In the days before we meet, he has been watching a box set of Adam Curtis's BBC series, All Watched Over by Machines of Loving Grace, about the implications of our digitised future, so the arguments are fresh in his head. "We were so into the net around the time of Kid A," he says. "Really thought it might be an amazing way of connecting and communicating. And then very quickly we started having meetings where people started talking about what we did as 'content'. They would show us letters from big media companies offering us millions in some mobile phone deal or whatever it was, and they would say all they need is some content. I was like, what is this 'content' which you describe? Just a filling of time and space with stuff, emotion, so you can sell it?"
Having thought they were subverting the corporate music industry with In Rainbows, he now fears they were inadvertently playing into the hands of Apple and Google and the rest. "They have to keep commodifying things to keep the share price up, but in doing so they have made all content, including music and newspapers, worthless, in order to make their billions. And this is what we want? I still think it will be undermined in some way. It doesn't make sense to me. Anyway, All Watched Over by Machines of Loving Grace. The commodification of human relationships through social networks. Amazing!"
I guess one of the primary responses to that kind of sell-off is live performance. Last year's Radiohead tour featured a lot of back catalogue as well as more recent songs. Playing them now must seem a lot like looking at old photos?
"Yes with bad haircuts. Of which I have had many… "
It's also a political journey, I imagine, the things-can-only-get-better hopes of pre-1997, the despair at what followed?
"The Blair years I was most angry with," he says. "Still am. Just the level of hypocrisy. I always feel strongly that line in The Gloaming: 'You are murderers – we are not the same as you'. We are still the generation who went into an illegal war. And the guy who took us there is giving lectures around the world and sitting in his lovely house with an armed guard. Every time I sing those words, I think of him sitting there. Thinking, what the fuck, how did we let him get away with that?"
I wonder if he feels his audiences have become more politicised in recent years? "What I find fascinating is the generation in America that are now students," he says. "In our Hail to the Thief period – 2003 – it was very raw and you had to be careful how you discussed things. Post-9/11 kids were realising that this bubble that they had been living in had burst, politically, economically. Their whole place in the world had gone. Now you find that campuses in America are far less confused, more switched on to those arguments."
Advertisement
At the same time, his recent work has seemed less confrontational in tone, not just with Atoms for Peace but also in the Buddhist inflections of the last Radiohead album, King of Limbs, which memorably featured Yorke doing a kind of manic tai chi dance in the video of his song Lotus Flower. Where has that antic spirit emerged from?
Partly, he says, it's quite a deliberate response to previous depressive tendencies. He armed himself against any midlife despair, he says, with a three-point plan: "Running, yoga, meditation." He wouldn't exactly describe himself as centred yet, he says, but he tries. While working on King of Limbs he took himself off into the park early every morning, sat on a bench for an hour. "It was important at the time," he says. "I wanted to be properly open-minded about what would happen in the studio." He suggests that approach might be a different kind of politics for him – "Just being looser in your thinking allows you to avoid fixed ideas." It allows him to take more physical pleasure in the craft and act of singing, he says, "how it makes you feel physically". He has come to discover that the best things that happen musically "are often when you're super-unsure and kind of flailing around. You just work at it and wait."
While he was in California, with Flea, Yorke became an unlikely surfing convert, if not quite a fully paid-up beach boy. Though he is still "pretty crap at it", he found the experience a useful exercise in patience. "I used always to try to force things, in the studio," he says. "But it's like, you can sit out there on a board for ages waiting for the right wave to come along. You can't get angry about it. You know it will happen eventually and you start to understand the waiting itself might be part of it. Part of the fun… "
The Rolling Stones drummer doesn't listen to his own band's songs any more, but he must be excited about playing Glastonbury, right? Er...
So Charlie, the Stones are playing Glastonbury! Excited?
I don't want to do it. Everyone else does. I don't like playing outdoors, and I certainly don't like festivals. I've always thought they're nothing to do with playing. Playing is what I'm doing at the weekend (1). That's how I was brought up. But that's me, personally. When you're a band … you do anything and everything. But Glastonbury, it's old hat really. I never liked the hippy thing to start with. It's not what I'd like to do for a weekend, I can tell you.
But surely …

[Interrupting] The worst thing playing outdoors is when the wind blows, if you're a drummer, because the cymbals move … it really is hard to play then.

Advertisement

Well, you're also playing Hyde Park this summer. What do you remember about your famous gig there in 1969 (2)?

Oh, quite a lot. The Dorchester! That was our dressing room. And Allen Klein walking about like Napoleon. He was the same kind of shape. And the armoured van going into the crowd. I had to rush around and get my silver trousers done for it. And then Mick Taylor, of course, it was his first big gig. And my wife got hit with a stale sandwich. I remember her going mad with that. I don't blame her. She got hit on the back. She reckoned it was stale because it obviously hurt a lot. The butterflies. I didn't like that, because the casualty rate was worse than the Somme. Half of them went woosh. And the other half of them were dead.
Sign up for the Sleeve Notes email: music news, bold reviews and unexpected extras
 Read more
Were you still in shock from Brian [Jones]'s death?

Shock? Brian dying? No. It was very sad but it wasn't unexpected. We'd carried him for a few tours and he was quite ill. We were young, we didn't know what was wrong with him. I still don't really. He always suffered from terrible asthma, and he drank heavily on the road and he got into drugs before anyone else in the band. It was a question of, "Do we carry on?"

And Mick Taylor joined the band …

Amazing player. I think we did our best music with Mick.

Hyde Park was the height of the hippy thing …

Altamont was more hippy than that, I thought. That was a very peculiar one, that was.
With a lot of big stadium bands these days, it feels like the staging of the show is the most important thing, whereas the Stones still strike me as being a real band. Sometimes you're good and sometimes … less so.
Mick [Jagger] is the show, really. We back him. But Mick wouldn't dance well if the sound was bad. It doesn't come into it with a lot of bands because the lead singer just stands there. We've always been about playing it properly. I don't mean technically brilliant … The rest is candyfloss, it's froth. You know, the costumes you're wearing, that's … [shrugs] What you're really doing is playing the drums or the guitar.
 The Rolling Stones in 1969, before their concert in Hyde Park. Left to right: Bill Wyman, Charlie Watts, Mick Jagger, Mick Taylor and Keith Richards. Photograph: PA
What do you think of drum machines?
They're great for songwriters and producers. Recording is a very precise thing – it's playing it dead right every time, and it can be fun. But if you're writing a song, it's great to be able to tell the machine you'd like it louder, rather than having to tell the drummer. It's not what I'm interested in. I like the drum kit sound and somebody playing it – preferably me, but it could be anyone.
Given your jazz background, was it a bit of a comedown when you joined the Stones?
It was more of a shock joining Alexis Korner (3). I'd never played with a harmonica player before – I couldn't believe Cyril Davies when he started playing! We only played out of London once, in Birmingham. Cyril got £1 because he was a professional musician; so did [sax player] Dick Heckstall-Smith and [bassist] Jack Bruce. I wasn't so I got half a crown. Fantastic, isn't it? Half a crown! The Stones were just another gig, but then we started touring around England … I was waiting to start another job, but I never went back to it. I was a bit out of sync with all of them, Brian, Mick and Keith [Richards], but Keith taught me to listen to Buddy Holly and things like that. Mick taught me a lot about playing with songs, really, the melodies and that.
Advertisement
Was part of the Stones' success down to the fact that each of you had really done your homework?
I sort of agree with that. Everything's easier and quicker now. I wanted to be Max Roach or Kenny Clarke playing in New York with Charlie Parker in the front line. Not a bad aspiration. It actually meant a lot of bloody playing, a lot of work. I don't think kids are interested in that. But that may be true of every generation, I don't know. When I was what you'd call a young musician, jazz was very fashionable. It was very hip to know there was a new Miles Davis album out. Now no one knows what records come out. Especially me! Because of this thing [gestures at my iPhone recording the interview, with the inference that it is somehow the devil's work] … But in those days … an album: you kept it, you treasured it.
You must have really studied the records you had.
Oh, we did. I remember a Duke Ellington album that we played for ever.
And you must have had to save up for them.
I'd swap things: a cymbal for a certain record … Then I'd go to Ray's Jazz Shop (4). That's when it was in New Oxford Street, in the basement of Collet's. God bless him! He was green, he was never allowed to see daylight, they used to keep him in the cellar. And then I'd sell the record and go and buy the cymbal back.
What was your big problem with the hippies when that all started?
I wasn't a great one for the philosophy and I thought the clothes were horrendous, even then.
So what did you think of the rest of the Stones in their Satanic Majesties phase?
I didn't mind them doing it. Brian was the first one at it. I remember him doing the London Palladium with his bloody hat on, and his pipe and sitar … fantastic. Brian was the first one to know and meet as a friend Bob Dylan, and Jimi Hendrix. He used to be fun in those days.
At the height of the Stones' success in the 60s, did you have a sense that you were making history?
No. It was just a case of keeping up with everyone else. It's still the same now.
You said the band did its best work with Mick Taylor. What's your favourite Stones song?
God, I don't really have one to be honest, I don't really listen to them that much.
Do you think Bill [Wyman] made a mistake in leaving the group?
No, not a mistake, because he was in the middle of a terrible marriage that he should never have got into – he had a horrendous time with the Mandy girl – and he then married a very good woman and had three children very quickly … and he was very, very happy. But it was a shame he left because a) it was great having him and b) I think he missed out on a very lucrative period in our existence. There were very sparse periods you went through building the band, and he didn't really reap the rewards that we do now.
What do you spend your money on?
Me? I collect things.
Yeah. There's a great place in Vienna. I collect jazz mostly. Drum kits as well. I've got one of Kenny Clarke's drum kits that he gave to Max Roach – I bought it off his widow. I have Duke Ellington's, the famous Sonny Greer drum kit, it's fantastic. Big Sid Catlett, one of the great 30s swing drummers, one of his … [continues in this vein for some time]. And books. Not antiquarian books. Signed first editions of mostly 20th-century writers. Agatha Christie: I've got every book she wrote in paperback. Graham Greene, I have all of them. Evelyn Waugh, he's another one. Wodehouse: everything he wrote.
It sounds like quite a healthy addiction.
Well, I'm old. It's not the sort of thing a boy of 20 would be keen on.
Have there been times when you've thought about knocking it on the head?
I thought that before the O2, but it was actually very comfortable to do. It was good fun, is what I meant to say.
But you had misgivings.
Misgivings? Yeah, oh yeah, I always do. It's a young person's [game]. The thing I find difficult is that 50% of it is image, not my side of it, but it is, and as you get a bit older you think, "Oh gawd!" I don't like looking at the pictures. I think Bowie looks all right. For some reason everyone's talking about David Bowie at the moment. But he does look good. Some others haven't weathered so well. And some guys who were really on fire haven't made it. It can take its toll on you. Without you knowing, or caring at the time, because you don't care when you're in your 30s or 40s.
Was it fun playing with Mick [Taylor] and Bill again at the O2 show?
It was great. I loved it.
And what about your guests, there and in the States?
It was really good. We were lucky we had Jeff Beck. He's a phenomenal player.
What about the younger bunch like Florence and the Machine?
Florence, she was all right. Lady Gaga was a really good sport. But they hung about with my granddaughter more than they did with me. We're silly old farts! I think Mick tries to keep up with them …
As well as Hyde Park, you've also announced a US tour.
It's a very short tour for us. It's only 18 shows. It's nothing.
Who's the driving force in putting the band back on the road?
Well, you wouldn't do it if Mick didn't want to do it. You've got to have Mick and Keith, but the driving force is Mick. If he's enthusiastic, he'll push everyone along. Keith's much more laidback about it.
Are they getting on well? Keith was quite rude about Mick in his book.
Oh yeah. Oh, that. Brothers, innit? Brothers in arms. You just let it take its course, really, things like that.
Is there any more new music in the offing?
There's nothing yet. I've lost track with the record industry world, I don't get it any more. It's gone beyond me. The last single I thought was very good, but things don't mean anything any more. They're just tacked on the end of a reissue – and that ends up selling more than a new album. It's not like when Sgt Pepper came out and you thought, "Blimey! We'd better do one better …" People say you need a new album out when you go on tour. Well, we did that on our last tour, and I don't know if the record sold. I suppose, as Mick says, it gives us something different to play on stage. It's not Brown Sugar again.
Does it ever feel like you're just going through the motions on stage?
Sometimes you're pot-boiling. Sometimes you're on song.
So will you get to a point where you say, "That's it, no more"?
You do now seriously have to look at your age, because if this goes on for another two years, I'll be 73. But I say that at the end of every tour. And then you have two weeks off and your wife says, "Aren't you going to work?"
(1) Charlie was looking forward to a gig with his boogie woogie group ABC&D at the Pizza Express jazz club in Soho, London.
(2) The Stones founder Brian Jones died two days before the free Hyde Park gig in London on 5 July 1969. Mick Jagger read one of Shelley's poems at the show to commemorate him as thousands of butterflies were released into the crowd. Mick Taylor made his live debut with the band as Brian's replacement. Allen Klein was their manager.
(3) Jazz fan Charlie was a member of Blues Incorporated, the UK's first amplified R&B band, lead by the late blues musician Korner.
(4) Ray Smith's jazz shop in London was a meeting place for generations of the capital's hippest musicians.

The Sugababes had instant success as one of Britain's most turbulent girl groups. Now Mutya, Keisha and Siobhán are back as MKS. Is it really all peace and love?
They don't like it when I call them the original Sugababes. "I hate that word, 'original'," says Mutya Buena.

"Hate it!" says Siobhán Donaghy, pulling in her shoulders.

"It makes us feel," says Keisha Buchanan, "150 years old."

What else to call them? Back in 2000 this trio debuted as the Sugababes with a bristling single, "Overload", that established them as one of the most interesting acts in millennial pop – teenagers, scowlers, minimalist dancers. The band began a piecemeal breakup almost immediately, Siobhán quitting within a year and Mutya departing in 2005. Substitutes were brought in around Keisha, who was herself replaced in 2009. A group called the Sugababes still exists, made up of new-Siobhán (Heidi Range), new-Mutya (Amelle Berrabah) and new-Keisha (Jade Ewan); an album from them is due next year. Meanwhile, the founding three have reunited to make an album of their own. A first single, "Flatline", comes out this month. They call themselves Mutya Keisha Siobhan – or MKS – now.


Well it's clearer than the alternatives I was going to suggest – the Sugadults, Splendababes, Sugababes 5.0. Or would that be a legal infringement?

"It doesn't matter who owns the name now," says Siobhán. "That's paperwork." (I take this to mean their rivals have formal rights.)

"Our music speaks for us," says Mutya.

Siobhán: "Only the three of us can write and sing the way we do."

Mutya: "Unfortunately they [the other Sugababes] don't have our vocals. Well, fortunately, actually."

Keisha: "Why are we even talking about them?"

"Everyone calls us the Sugababes anyway," says Mutya.

"Like last night on Old Compton Street," says Siobhán.

"Well, there you go."


Mutya Keisha Siobhan - Flatline on MUZU.TV.

They draw attention when they go out, Mutya Keisha Siobhan. Pop allows no definitive endings (Ginger Spice rejoined and Gary and Robbie made up; Backstreet, just this year, came back), but even so – this lot? Pals again? We meet for lunch in a London restaurant and strangers keep looming up from nearby tables to take pictures on cameraphones. I can almost hear the O, the M, the G being tapped in for Twitter dispersal. It's the original Sugababes! And I thought they couldn't stand each other…

Consider the she-said-she-said, at least as it played out in the press. Keisha once told Touch magazine that Siobhán had ditched the band, back in 2001, by going to the loo and never coming back. "After three hours we thought she's been in there a bit long," Keisha was quoted as saying, and this repeatable bit of fiction tailed Siobhán for a decade. Siobhán, for her part, once admitted: "We just didn't get on." When Mutya left the band Keisha said: "There was love there but no friendship". Siobhán, in 2004: "It was all hate, hate, hate."

"Well, our mums always got on," Siobhán tells me, over lunch.

"Even when we didn't," says Keisha.

Of mean statements in the past, they agree, "It's important we remember we were kids."

And that toilet thing, says Mutya, "was quite funny."

Siobhán: "But it kind of gets old after a while."

Mutya: "Yeah."

Keisha has always been wonderfully blunt about the pop industry – beneath the sparkle that relentless push for profit. Whenever a Sugababe left and was replaced Keisha would say something like, "That's business." Was it a business decision to reform? "No," she says. "For us it was deeply personal. Let me use the right words: people didn't allow us to enjoy the experience the first time round."

They've earned enough money, Keisha says, not to have to do this. "I own five houses. Mutya has two properties. Siobhán bought a house a year ago. Making money is amazing, absolutely, but for us the idea of getting back together was more: 'Why don't we try again, and this time enjoy it?'" During a recent fortnight in Los Angles, a trip to write and record with the producer Dev Hynes (aka Lightspeed Champion), they made time to visit theme parks. They went clubbing in Koreatown. An experiment with an over-the-counter energy supplement left them aching and hungover and wondering if they'd inadvertently taken speed to hike Runyon Canyon.

"To be honest we were pissed half the time," admits Siobhán. She is dressed in hugging jeans, boots, a patterned scarf over a vest. Her basic daily uniform, says Siobhán – and a contrast to Keisha's all-over black bodysuit and aviator jacket. At a time when Keisha was still a Sugababe and Mutya was intermittently touring her solo stuff, Siobhán had re-entered civilian life. From 2006 to 2011 she worked as a model booker in London. Sometimes clients would ask: that Siobhán? But mostly "there wasn't enough time. The phone would be ringing. Paris every season. It was a nice job."


Siobhán has a pleasant, maternal manner – "I miss my girls," she says of the young models she worked with – and it seems obvious to me she's returning to music from a more conventional world. Keisha's different. She arrives at lunch a little flustered, admitting she's not properly familiar, at 28, with public transport. A decade as a Sugababe always meant a driver, but this time the band are "taking control", "no external forces", "organising shoots, preparing our own diary", "girl-powering this shit up". And that sometimes means getting the tube.

"I'm hands-on with the business side of things," says Keisha. "Siobhán does the creative side. And Mutya…"

Mutya's the balance, explains Siobhán.

"What it is," says Mutya, "is there's no point me trying to butt in. I know Siobhán knows her business. I know Keisha knows her business. And I know that eventually they'll tell me about it."

Mutya is like nobody I've met. She wears a leather jacket studded with metal spikes and is smothered in tattoos including one, in Latin, that she can no longer remember how to translate. She's a tireless boob adjuster, "double-Ds, dropping now." She has a habit of inserting strange punctuation into her speech, so that one sentence might unexpectedly become three.

"Jesus! I'm about to fall in. The water."

It is a week after our lunch and the girls have gathered by the River Colne in Hertfordshire for the Observer Magazine's shoot. Wearing white dresses they step off the grassy bank and into the water, wading up to their waists to have dramatic pictures taken. Siobhán is professional about the discomfort and helps to pat beasties from her bandmates' clothes. Keisha, surrounded by the floating tails of her dress, makes an unprintable joke about menstrual cycles. Mutya is struggling – her bra is waterlogged and there's pond-life everywhere. "What is it? I don't even. Fish! Dragonfly! For the love! If I get eaten by the Loch Ness monster I swear. To god."

 Mutya Keisha Siobhan
 Mutya Keisha Siobhan Photograph: Phil Fisk
After a 40-minute dip the girls change their sodden outfits and take a break in the sun. Siobhán mentions her wedding, earlier in the year, to a sailor, Chris. Keisha's boyfriend, a football agent, ferries in a McDonald's. Mutya talks about her daughter, eight-year-old Tahlia. "Look at them," says Siobhán's sister, Róisin, on hand to do make-up, "married and mums".
Soon Mutya and Keisha are reminiscing about how this all started. "My parents called me from downstairs," says Keisha. "I was probably about six. They said, 'Look, look!'"
A talent show hosted by Michael Barrymore was on TV. "And there was this little Filipino girl, with long hair down her back, singing 'The Greatest Love of All'. I'd never seen anyone as small as me sing like that." Not long afterwards Keisha's family, Jamaican northwest Londoners, moved home and Keisha started at a new primary school. "She was the first person I saw, hair on the carpet – the Filipino girl from Barrymore." Mutya became a friend and they belted out "Feed the World" together in the playground.
Siobhán was another talented child, a champion Irish dancer at five. A manager introduced the young redhead to Mutya and as young teens the pair were taken to sing for label bosses, Siobhán doing the high notes, Mutya the low. When Keisha joined them they almost became "The Q-tees" but one of their managers (this was a growing crowd) suggested a different name. "We ate a lot of junk food and sweets," Keisha recalls, and by the time they were recording together, "we were the Sugar Babes. With an 'r'. I think we had to change that, legally, because Sugar Babes was a porn site or something."

 Sugababes at age 16 and 17, standing against a wall
 'When people saw pound signs, everything changed. They took away our teenage years': (from left) Keisha, age 16; Siobhán, 17, and Mutya, 16. Photograph: Getty
Keisha still has their old demo CDs. "Adorable, very 90s… I stopped listening to them after a while. I would think: 'Oh, if we were just left to it, we could have done so much.'" A deal with London Records came in 1998 and One Touch, their first album, was released in November 2000. They think back on those years with some fondness and a lot of scepticism. All-night sessions in the studio. Piercings. Snuck cigarettes. "Harmless stuff, really. And there was a lot of shit going on around us," says Siobhán. "We never did any of it." They left school at 14, to be home-tutored. Their retinue grew.

Keisha: "At one point we had eight managers."

Siobhán: "We were like: who are these people?"

Mutya: "One did this, one did that, one picked his nose."

Keisha: "Our parents were there, but…"

Mutya: "They got pushed to the side."

Keisha: "My mum doesn't know what she was thinking, now. I think we will each always have a…"


Siobhán: "A grudge."

The girls have discussed it and believe they were manipulated.

Keisha: "They'd whisper to one of us: 'You should go solo.' And to another of us: 'So-and-so doesn't like you.'"

Siobhán: "Who would do that to young girls? We thought it was a creative environment and everyone was having fun. When people saw pound signs, everything changed. That was the taking away of our teenage years, for me."

By the spring of 2001 Siobhán wanted out. She felt isolated by the tutoring ("I was in the year above the other two so I had to take lessons on my own") and depressed – possibly a side effect of taking medication for acne. On tour in Australia she told her managers she was leaving and flew home. A press release went out announcing that Siobhán had a kidney infection ("Disgusting, they didn't even call me") and within a week her replacement, Heidi, had been signed.


Sugababes - Angels With Dirty Faces on MUZU.TV.
Mutya left in 2005 to spend more time with her daughter. Neither she nor Siobhán have particularly fond memories of trying for solo careers. Siobhán: "I think we both did it out of necessity rather than want. All you've ever known is music. And there's the question of education. What are you going to go and do?"

Siobhán released two records, the first a No 117 flop but the second, Ghosts, a critical hit ("I won't better it"). Mutya put out an album of her own, Real Girl, in 2007 and Keisha plowed on with the Sugababes. In 2007 there was another UK No 1 single, "About You Now", the Sugababes' sixth, and then in 2009 Keisha tweeted: "It was not my choice to leave."

She says she's legally constrained from discussing her departure from the Sugababes, although "it was a pack of shite, basically, their reasons for me not being in the group any more. I believe that truth always comes out in the end. And karma…"

Mutya: "Karma's a bitch."
Keisha: "That's just a universal rule."
They might have drifted back together earlier. "I saw you both at a birthday party," remembers Siobhán. "We had a chat, to clear the air, but it was in a nightclub, the timing wasn't right." One day Keisha saw Mutya on TV again; not with Barrymore this time, but Lorraine Kelly. The TV host joked that the original Sugababes should reform. Keisha (at home) and Mutya (on set) thought: Hmm. There were talks that stalled in 2009 and then in 2011 the three of them spent a day in a studio together. "The [vocal] blend was ridiculous. So we continued."
Before a comeback gig in London in January they had to watch old YouTube videos of themselves to relearn their routines. Mutya brought along eight-year-old Tahlia for support. Siobhán's family were there, and Keisha's mum. "They hadn't seen each other for years. It was emotional." At one point Keisha tried to explain the tortured history of the Sugababes to Tahlia. "She was like, 'I don't understand!' I was like, 'Look. There were many, many, many members, yeah?'"
It's time for more photographs in the river. While the girls clamber back into the chilly water, I listen to their new album. It's polished, very good in parts, a surprising seam of electropop along with the expected, hook-y R&B. One track has this plea: "Let me stay pals again." The line is Mutya's and that funny syntax makes me think she might have written it, too. As a sentiment, anyway, it makes sense.
The girls told me over lunch they expect this second run together to be a long one. "We definitely want to establish a body of work… It might never end!" Wasn't there a risk of them going through it all again, I asked, only to repeat the same mistakes? Siobhán answered. "Yeah," she said. "But that's sort of life, isn't it?"
In the murky water Siobhán leads a teetering line of original Sugababes away from the bank. Keisha chats about birthday plans. Siobhán picks pond weed from their dresses. And Mutya maintains a running commentary, talking to the water, to the sky, to anyone who'll listen.
"Go! Away! Fish!... Oh, shit me... Fish!… Tadpoles!... I'm standing on, like, a cliff?... There are little worms up and down my legs and I've got no knickers on."
Music
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Music
Music lesson Staatliche Antikensammlungen 2421.jpg
A painting on an ancient Greek vase depicts a music lesson (c. 510 BCE).
Medium	Sound, silence, time
Originating culture	Various
Originating era	Paleolithic era
Music is an art form and cultural activity whose medium is sound organized in time. The common elements of music are pitch (which governs melody and harmony), rhythm (and its associated concepts tempo, meter, and articulation), dynamics (loudness and softness), and the sonic qualities of timbre and texture (which are sometimes termed the "color" of a musical sound). Different styles or types of music may emphasize, de-emphasize or omit some of these elements. Music is performed with a vast range of instruments and vocal techniques ranging from singing to rapping; there are solely instrumental pieces, solely vocal pieces (such as songs without instrumental accompaniment) and pieces that combine singing and instruments. The word derives from Greek μουσική (mousike; "art of the Muses"). See glossary of musical terminology.

In its most general form, the activities describing music as an art form or cultural activity include the creation of works of music (songs, tunes, symphonies, and so on), the criticism of music, the study of the history of music, and the aesthetic examination of music. Ancient Greek and Indian philosophers defined music as tones ordered horizontally as melodies and vertically as harmonies. Common sayings such as "the harmony of the spheres" and "it is music to my ears" point to the notion that music is often ordered and pleasant to listen to. However, 20th-century composer John Cage thought that any sound can be music, saying, for example, "There is no noise, only sound."

The creation, performance, significance, and even the definition of music vary according to culture and social context. Indeed, throughout history, some new forms or styles of music have been criticized as "not being music", including Beethoven's Grosse Fuge string quartet in 1825, early jazz in the beginning of the 1900s and hardcore punk in the 1980s. There are many types of music, including popular music, traditional music, art music, music written for religious ceremonies and work songs such as chanteys. Music ranges from strictly organized compositions–such as Classical music symphonies from the 1700s and 1800s, through to spontaneously played improvisational music such as jazz, and avant-garde styles of chance-based contemporary music from the 20th and 21st centuries.

Music can be divided into genres (e.g., country music) and genres can be further divided into subgenres (e.g., country blues and pop country are two of the many country subgenres), although the dividing lines and relationships between music genres are often subtle, sometimes open to personal interpretation, and occasionally controversial. For example, it can be hard to draw the line between some early 1980s hard rock and heavy metal. Within the arts, music may be classified as a performing art, a fine art or as an auditory art. Music may be played or sung and heard live at a rock concert or orchestra performance, heard live as part of a dramatic work (a music theater show or opera), or it may be recorded and listened to on a radio, MP3 player, CD player, smartphone or as film score or TV show.

In many cultures, music is an important part of people's way of life, as it plays a key role in religious rituals, rite of passage ceremonies (e.g., graduation and marriage), social activities (e.g., dancing) and cultural activities ranging from amateur karaoke singing to playing in an amateur funk band or singing in a community choir. People may make music as a hobby, like a teen playing cello in a youth orchestra, or work as a professional musician or singer. The music industry includes the individuals who create new songs and musical pieces (such as songwriters and composers), individuals who perform music (which include orchestra, jazz band and rock band musicians, singers and conductors), individuals who record music (music producers and sound engineers), individuals who organize concert tours, and individuals who sell recordings and sheet music and scores to customers.

Etymology

In Greek mythology, the nine Muses were the inspiration for many creative endeavors, including the arts.
The word derives from Greek μουσική (mousike; "art of the Muses"). In Greek mythology, the nine Muses were the goddesses who inspired literature, science, and the arts and who were the source of the knowledge embodied in the poetry, song-lyrics, and myths in the Greek culture. According to the Online Etymological Dictionary, the term "music" is derived from "mid-13c., musike, from Old French musique (12c.) and directly from Latin musica "the art of music," also including poetry (also [the] source of Spanish musica, Italian musica, Old High German mosica, German Musik, Dutch muziek, Danish musik)." This is derived from the "...Greek mousike (techne) "(art) of the Muses," from fem. of mousikos "pertaining to the Muses," from Mousa "Muse" (see muse (n.)). Modern spelling [dates] from [the] 1630s. In classical Greece, [the term "music" refers to] any art in which the Muses presided, but especially music and lyric poetry."

As a form of art or entertainment

Jean-Gabriel Ferlan performing at a 2008 concert at the collège-lycée Saint-François Xavier
Music is composed and performed for many purposes, ranging from aesthetic pleasure, religious or ceremonial purposes, or as an entertainment product for the marketplace. When music was only available through sheet music scores, such as during the Classical and Romantic eras, music lovers would buy the sheet music of their favourite pieces and songs so that they could perform them at home on the piano. With the advent of sound recording, records of popular songs, rather than sheet music became the dominant way that music lovers would enjoy their favourite songs. With the advent of home tape recorders in the 1980s and digital music in the 1990s, music lovers could make tapes or playlists of their favourite songs and take them with them on a portable cassette player or MP3 player. Some music lovers create mix tapes of their favorite songs, which serve as a "self-portrait, a gesture of friendship, prescription for an ideal party... [and] an environment consisting solely of what is most ardently loved."

Amateur musicians can compose or perform music for their own pleasure, and derive their income elsewhere. Professional musicians are employed by a range of institutions and organisations, including armed forces (in marching bands, concert bands and popular music groups), churches and synagogues, symphony orchestras, broadcasting or film production companies, and music schools. Professional musicians sometimes work as freelancers or session musicians, seeking contracts and engagements in a variety of settings. There are often many links between amateur and professional musicians. Beginning amateur musicians take lessons with professional musicians. In community settings, advanced amateur musicians perform with professional musicians in a variety of ensembles such as community concert bands and community orchestras.

A distinction is often made between music performed for a live audience and music that is performed in a studio so that it can be recorded and distributed through the music retail system or the broadcasting system. However, there are also many cases where a live performance in front of an audience is also recorded and distributed. Live concert recordings are popular in both classical music and in popular music forms such as rock, where illegally taped live concerts are prized by music lovers. In the jam band scene, live, improvised jam sessions are preferred to studio recordings.

Composition

People composing music in 2013 using electronic keyboards and computers.

French Baroque music composer Michel Richard Delalande (1657–1726), pen in hand.
"Composition" is the act or practice of creating a song, an instrumental music piece, a work with both singing and instruments, or another type of music. In many cultures, including Western classical music, the act of composing also includes the creation of music notation, such as a sheet music "score", which is then performed by the composer or by other singers or musicians. In popular music and traditional music, the act of composing, which is typically called songwriting, may involve the creation of a basic outline of the song, called the lead sheet, which sets out the melody, lyrics and chord progression. In classical music, the composer typically orchestrates his or her own compositions, but in musical theatre and in pop music, songwriters may hire an arranger to do the orchestration. In some cases, a songwriter may not use notation at all, and instead compose the song in her mind and then play or record it from memory. In jazz and popular music, notable recordings by influential performers are given the weight that written scores play in classical music.

Even when music is notated relatively precisely, as in classical music, there are many decisions that a performer has to make, because notation does not specify all of the elements of music precisely. The process of deciding how to perform music that has been previously composed and notated is termed "interpretation". Different performers' interpretations of the same work of music can vary widely, in terms of the tempos that are chosen and the playing or singing style or phrasing of the melodies. Composers and songwriters who present their own music are interpreting their songs, just as much as those who perform the music of others. The standard body of choices and techniques present at a given time and a given place is referred to as performance practice, whereas interpretation is generally used to mean the individual choices of a performer.
Although a musical composition often uses musical notation and has a single author, this is not always the case. A work of music can have multiple composers, which often occurs in popular music when a band collaborates to write a song, or in musical theatre, when one person writes the melodies, a second person writes the lyrics, and a third person orchestrates the songs. In some styles of music, such as the blues, a composer/songwriter may create, perform and record new songs or pieces without ever writing them down in music notation. A piece of music can also be composed with words, images, or computer programs that explain or notate how the singer or musician should create musical sounds. Examples range from avant-garde music that uses graphic notation, to text compositions such as Aus den sieben Tagen, to computer programs that select sounds for musical pieces. Music that makes heavy use of randomness and chance is called aleatoric music, and is associated with contemporary composers active in the 20th century, such as John Cage, Morton Feldman, and Witold Lutosławski. A more commonly known example of chance-based music is the sound of wind chimes jingling in a breeze.

The study of composition has traditionally been dominated by examination of methods and practice of Western classical music, but the definition of composition is broad enough to include the creation of popular music and traditional music songs and instrumental pieces as well as spontaneously improvised works like those of free jazz performers and African percussionists such as Ewe drummers.

Notation

Sheet music is written representation of music. This is a homorhythmic (i.e., hymn-style) arrangement of a traditional piece entitled "Adeste Fideles", in standard two-staff format for mixed voices. About this sound Play
In the 2000s, music notation typically means the written expression of music notes and rhythms on paper using symbols. When music is written down, the pitches and rhythm of the music, such as the notes of a melody, are notated. Music notation also often provides instructions on how to perform the music. For example, the sheet music for a song may state that the song is a "slow blues" or a "fast swing", which indicates the tempo and the genre. To read music notation, a person must have an understanding of music theory, harmony and the performance practice associated with a particular song or piece's genre.

Written notation varies with style and period of music. In the 2000s, notated music is produced as sheet music or, for individuals with computer scorewriter programs, as an image on a computer screen. In ancient times, music notation was put onto stone or clay tablets. To perform music from notation, a singer or instrumentalist requires an understanding of the rhythmic and pitch elements embodied in the symbols and the performance practice that is associated with a piece of music or a genre. In genres requiring musical improvisation, the performer often plays from music where only the chord changes and form of the song are written, requiring the performer to have a great understanding of the music's structure, harmony and the styles of a particular genre (e.g., jazz or country music).

In Western art music, the most common types of written notation are scores, which include all the music parts of an ensemble piece, and parts, which are the music notation for the individual performers or singers. In popular music, jazz, and blues, the standard musical notation is the lead sheet, which notates the melody, chords, lyrics (if it is a vocal piece), and structure of the music. Fake books are also used in jazz; they may consist of lead sheets or simply chord charts, which permit rhythm section members to improvise an accompaniment part to jazz songs. Scores and parts are also used in popular music and jazz, particularly in large ensembles such as jazz "big bands." In popular music, guitarists and electric bass players often read music notated in tablature (often abbreviated as "tab"), which indicates the location of the notes to be played on the instrument using a diagram of the guitar or bass fingerboard. Tabulature was also used in the Baroque era to notate music for the lute, a stringed, fretted instrument.

Improvisation
Musical improvisation is the creation of spontaneous music, often within (or based on) a pre-existing harmonic framework or chord progression. Improvisation is the act of instantaneous composition by performers, where compositional techniques are employed with or without preparation. Improvisation is a major part of some types of music, such as blues, jazz, and jazz fusion, in which instrumental performers improvise solos, melody lines and accompaniment parts. In the Western art music tradition, improvisation was an important skill during the Baroque era and during the Classical era. In the Baroque era, performers improvised ornaments and basso continuo keyboard players improvised chord voicings based on figured bass notation. In the Classical era, solo performers and singers improvised virtuoso cadenzas during concerts. However, in the 20th and early 21st century, as "common practice" Western art music performance became institutionalized in symphony orchestras, opera houses and ballets, improvisation has played a smaller role. At the same time, some modern composers have increasingly included improvisation in their creative work. In Indian classical music, improvisation is a core component and an essential criterion of performances.

Theory
Music theory encompasses the nature and mechanics of music. It often involves identifying patterns that govern composers' techniques and examining the language and notation of music. In a grand sense, music theory distills and analyzes the parameters or elements of music – rhythm, harmony (harmonic function), melody, structure, form, and texture. Broadly, music theory may include any statement, belief, or conception of or about music. People who study these properties are known as music theorists. Some have applied acoustics, human physiology, and psychology to the explanation of how and why music is perceived.

Elements
Music has many different fundamentals or elements. Depending on the definition of "element" being used, these can include: pitch, beat or pulse, tempo, rhythm, melody, harmony, texture, style, allocation of voices, timbre or color, dynamics, expression, articulation, form and structure. The elements of music feature prominently in the music curriculums of Australia, UK and US. All three curriculums identify pitch, dynamics, timbre and texture as elements, but the other identified elements of music are far from universally agreed. Below is a list of the three official versions of the "elements of music":

Australia: pitch, timbre, texture, dynamics and expression, rhythm, form and structure.
UK: pitch, timbre, texture, dynamics, duration, tempo, structure.
USA: pitch, timbre, texture, dynamics, rhythm, form, harmony, style/articulation.
In relation to the UK curriculum, in 2013 the term: "appropriate musical notations" was added to their list of elements and the title of the list was changed from the "elements of music" to the "inter-related dimensions of music". The inter-related dimensions of music are listed as: pitch, duration, dynamics, tempo, timbre, texture, structure and appropriate musical notations.

The phrase "the elements of music" is used in a number of different contexts. The two most common contexts can be differentiated by describing them as the "rudimentary elements of music" and the "perceptual elements of music".

Rudimentary elements
In the 1800s, the phrases "the elements of music" and "the rudiments of music" were used interchangeably. The elements described in these documents refer to aspects of music that are needed in order to become a musician, Recent writers such as Estrella  seem to be using the phrase "elements of music" in a similar manner. A definition which most accurately reflects this usage is: "the rudimentary principles of an art, science, etc.: the elements of grammar." The UK's curriculum switch to the "inter-related dimensions of music" seems to be a move back to using the rudimentary elements of music.

Perceptual elements
Since the emergence of the study of psychoacoustics in the 1930s, most lists of elements of music have related more to how we hear music than how we learn to play it or study it. C.E. Seashore, in his book Psychology of Music, identified four "psychological attributes of sound". These were: "pitch, loudness, time, and timbre" (p. 3). He did not call them the "elements of music" but referred to them as "elemental components" (p. 2). Nonetheless these elemental components link precisely with four of the most common musical elements: "Pitch" and "timbre" match exactly, "loudness" links with dynamics and "time" links with the time-based elements of rhythm, duration and tempo. This usage of the phrase "the elements of music" links more closely with Webster's New 20th Century Dictionary definition of an element as: "a substance which cannot be divided into a simpler form by known methods" and educational institutions' lists of elements generally align with this definition as well.

Although writers of lists of "rudimentary elements of music" can vary their lists depending on their personal (or institutional) priorities, the perceptual elements of music should consist of an established (or proven) list of discrete elements which can be independently manipulated to achieve an intended musical effect. It seems at this stage that there is still research to be done in this area.

Analysis of styles

Funk places most of its emphasis on rhythm and groove, with entire songs based around a vamp on a single chord. Pictured are the influential funk musicians George Clinton and Parliament Funkadelic in 2006.
Some styles of music place an emphasis on certain of these fundamentals, while others place less emphasis on certain elements. To give one example, while Bebop-era jazz makes use of very complex chords, including altered dominants and challenging chord progressions, with chords changing two or more times per bar and keys changing several times in a tune, funk places most of its emphasis on rhythm and groove, with entire songs based around a vamp on a single chord. While Romantic era classical music from the mid- to late-1800s makes great use of dramatic changes of dynamics, from whispering pianissimo sections to thunderous fortissimo sections, some entire Baroque dance suites for harpsichord from the early 1700s may use a single dynamic. To give another example, while some art music pieces, such as symphonies are very long, some pop songs are just a few minutes long.

Description of elements
Pitch and melody
Pitch is an aspect of a sound that we can hear, reflecting whether one musical sound, note or tone is "higher" or "lower" than another musical sound, note or tone. We can talk about the highness or lowness of pitch in the more general sense, such as the way a listener hears a piercingly high piccolo note or whistling tone as higher in pitch than a deep thump of a bass drum. We also talk about pitch in the precise sense associated with musical melodies, basslines and chords. Precise pitch can only be determined in sounds that have a frequency that is clear and stable enough to distinguish from noise. For example, it is much easier for listeners to discern the pitch of a single note played on a piano than to try to discern the pitch of a crash cymbal that is struck.


The melody to the traditional song "Pop Goes the Weasel" About this sound Play
A melody (also called a "tune") is a series of pitches (notes) sounding in succession (one after the other), often in a rising and falling pattern. The notes of a melody are typically created using pitch systems such as scales or modes. Melodies also often contain notes from the chords used in the song. The melodies in simple folk songs and traditional songs may use only the notes of a single scale, the scale associated with the tonic note or key of a given song. For example, a folk song in the key of C (also referred to as C major) may have a melody that uses only the notes of the C major scale (the individual notes C, D, E, F, G, A, B and C; these are the "white notes" on a piano keyboard. On the other hand, Bebop-era jazz from the 1940s and contemporary music from the 20th and 21st centuries may use melodies with many chromatic notes (i.e., notes in addition to the notes of the major scale; on a piano, a chromatic scale would include all the notes on the keyboard, including the "white notes" and "black notes" and unusual scales, such as the whole tone scale (a whole tone scale in the key of C would contain the notes C, D, E, F♯, G♯ and A♯). A low, deep musical line played by bass instruments such as double bass, electric bass or tuba is called a bassline.

Harmony and chords

When musicians play three or more different notes at the same time, this creates a chord. In Western music, including classical music, pop music, rock music and many related styles, the most common chords are triads– three notes usually played at the same time. The most commonly used chords are the major chord and the minor chord. An example of a major chord is the three pitches C, E and G. An example of a minor chord is the three pitches A, C and E. (Pictured is a guitar player performing a chord on a guitar).
Harmony refers to the "vertical" sounds of pitches in music, which means pitches that are played or sung together at the same time to create a chord. Usually this means the notes are played at the same time, although harmony may also be implied by a melody that outlines a harmonic structure (i.e., by using melody notes that are played one after the other, outlining the notes of a chord). In music written using the system of major-minor tonality ("keys"), which includes most classical music written from 1600 to 1900 and most Western pop, rock and traditional music, the key of a piece determines the scale used, which centres around the "home note" or tonic of the key. Simple classical pieces and many pop and traditional music songs are written so that all the music is in a single key. More complex Classical, pop and traditional music songs and pieces may have two keys (and in some cases three or more keys). Classical music from the Romantic era (written from about 1820–1900) often contains multiple keys, as does jazz, especially Bebop jazz from the 1940s, in which the key or "home note" of a song may change every four bars or even every two bars.

Rhythm
Rhythm is the arrangement of sounds and silences in time. Meter animates time in regular pulse groupings, called measures or bars, which in Western classical, popular and traditional music often group notes in sets of two (e.g., 2/4 time), three (e.g., 3/4 time, also known as Waltz time, or 3/8 time), or four (e.g., 4/4 time). Meters are made easier to hear because songs and pieces often (but not always) place an emphasis on the first beat of each grouping. Notable exceptions exist, such as the backbeat used in much Western pop and rock, in which a song that uses a measure that consists of four beats (called 4/4 time or common time) will have accents on beats two and four, which are typically performed by the drummer on the snare drum, a loud and distinctive-sounding percussion instrument. In pop and rock, the rhythm parts of a song are played by the rhythm section, which includes chord-playing instruments (e.g., electric guitar, acoustic guitar, piano, or other keyboard instruments), a bass instrument (typically electric bass or for some styles such as jazz and bluegrass, double bass) and a drum kit player.

Texture
Musical texture is the overall sound of a piece of music or song. The texture of a piece or sing is determined by how the melodic, rhythmic, and harmonic materials are combined in a composition, thus determining the overall nature of the sound in a piece. Texture is often described in regard to the density, or thickness, and range, or width, between lowest and highest pitches, in relative terms as well as more specifically distinguished according to the number of voices, or parts, and the relationship between these voices (see common types below). For example, a thick texture contains many 'layers' of instruments. One of these layers could be a string section, or another brass. The thickness also is affected by the amount and the richness of the instruments. Texture is commonly described according to the number of and relationship between parts or lines of music:

monophony: a single melody (or "tune") with neither instrumental accompaniment nor a harmony part. A mother singing a lullaby to her baby would be an example.
heterophony: two or more instruments or singers playing/singing the same melody, but with each performer slightly varying the rhythm or speed of the melody or adding different ornaments to the melody. Two bluegrass fiddlers playing the same traditional fiddle tune together will typically each vary the melody a bit and each add different ornaments.
polyphony: multiple independent melody lines that interweave together, which are sung or played at the same time. Choral music written in the Renaissance music era was typically written in this style. A round, which is a song such as "Row, Row, Row Your Boat", which different groups of singers all start to sing at a different time, is a simple example of polyphony.
homophony: a clear melody supported by chordal accompaniment. Most Western popular music songs from the 19th century onward are written in this texture.
Music that contains a large number of independent parts (e.g., a double concerto accompanied by 100 orchestral instruments with many interweaving melodic lines) is generally said to have a "thicker" or "denser" texture than a work with few parts (e.g., a solo flute melody accompanied by a single cello).

Timbre or "tone color"
Timbre, sometimes called "color" or "tone color" is the quality or sound of a voice or instrument. Timbre is what makes a particular musical sound different from another, even when they have the same pitch and loudness. For example, a 440 Hz A note sounds different when it is played on oboe, piano, violin or electric guitar. Even if different players of the same instrument play the same note, their notes might sound different due to differences in instrumental technique (e.g., different embouchures), different types of accessories (e.g., mouthpieces for brass players, reeds for oboe and bassoon players) or strings made out of different materials for string players (e.g., gut strings versus steel strings). Even two instrumentalists playing the same note on the same instrument (one after the other) may sound different due to different ways of playing the instrument (e.g., two string players might hold the bow differently).

The physical characteristics of sound that determine the perception of timbre include the spectrum, envelope and overtones of a note or musical sound. For electric instruments developed in the 20th century, such as electric guitar, electric bass and electric piano, the performer can also change the tone by adjusting equalizer controls, tone controls on the instrument, and by using electronic effects units such as distortion pedals. The tone of the electric Hammond organ is controlled by adjusting drawbars.

Expression

Singers add expression to the melodies they sing using many methods, including changing the tone of their singing, adding vibrato to certain notes, and emphasizing important words in the lyrics.
Expressive qualities are those elements in music that create change in music without changing the main pitches or substantially changing the rhythms of the melody and its accompaniment. Performers, including singers and instrumentalists, can add musical expression to a song or piece by adding phrasing, by adding effects such as vibrato (with voice and some instruments, such as guitar, violin, brass instruments and woodwinds), dynamics (the loudness or softness of piece or a section of it), tempo fluctuations (e.g., ritardando or accelerando, which are, respectively slowing down and speeding up the tempo), by adding pauses or fermatas on a cadence, and by changing the articulation of the notes (e.g., making notes more pronounced or accented, by making notes more legato, which means smoothly connected, or by making notes shorter).

Expression is achieved through the manipulation of pitch (such as inflection, vibrato, slides etc.), volume (dynamics, accent, tremolo etc.), duration (tempo fluctuations, rhythmic changes, changing note duration such as with legato and staccato, etc.), timbre (e.g. changing vocal timbre from a light to a resonant voice) and sometimes even texture (e.g. doubling the bass note for a richer effect in a piano piece). Expression therefore can be seen as a manipulation of all elements in order to convey "an indication of mood, spirit, character etc."  and as such cannot be included as a unique perceptual element of music, although it can be considered an important rudimentary element of music.

Form

Sheet music notation for the chorus (refrain) of the Christmas song "Jingle Bells" About this sound Play
In music, form describes how the overall structure or plan of a song or piece of music, and it describes the layout of a composition as divided into sections. In the early 20th century, Tin Pan Alley songs and Broadway musical songs were often in AABA 32 bar form, in which the A sections repeated the same eight bar melody and the B section provided a contrasting melody and/or harmony for 8 bars. From the 1960s onward, Western pop and rock songs are often in verse-chorus form, which is based around a sequence of verse and chorus ("refrain") sections, with new lyrics for most verses and repeating lyrics for the choruses. Popular music often makes use of strophic form, sometimes in conjunction with the twelve bar blues.
In the tenth edition of The Oxford Companion to Music, Percy Scholes defines musical form as "a series of strategies designed to find a successful mean between the opposite extremes of unrelieved repetition and unrelieved alteration." Examples of common forms of Western music include the fugue, the invention, sonata-allegro, canon, strophic, theme and variations, and rondo. Scholes states that European classical music had only six stand-alone forms: simple binary, simple ternary, compound binary, rondo, air with variations, and fugue (although musicologist Alfred Mann emphasized that the fugue is primarily a method of composition that has sometimes taken on certain structural conventions.)

Where a piece cannot readily be broken down into sectional units (though it might borrow some form from a poem, story or programme), it is said to be through-composed. Such is often the case with a fantasia, prelude, rhapsody, etude (or study), symphonic poem, Bagatelle, impromptu, etc. Professor Charles Keil classified forms and formal detail as "sectional, developmental, or variational."

Sectional form
This form is built from a sequence of clear-cut units that may be referred to by letters but also often have generic names such as introduction and coda, exposition, development and recapitulation, verse, chorus or refrain, and bridge. Introductions and codas, when they are no more than that, are frequently excluded from formal analysis. All such units may typically be eight measures long. Sectional forms include:

Strophic form
This form is defined by its "unrelieved repetition" (AAAA...).

Medley
Medley, potpourri is the extreme opposite, that of "unrelieved variation": it is simply an indefinite sequence of self-contained sections (ABCD...), sometimes with repeats (AABBCCDD...). Examples include orchestral overtures, which are sometimes no more than a string of the best tunes of the musical theatre show or opera to come.

Binary form

Binary form in major and minor keys. Each section must be at least three phrases long.
This form uses two sections (AB...), each often repeated (AABB...). In 18th-century Western classical music, "simple binary" form was often used for dances and carried with it the convention that the two sections should be in different musical keys but same rhythm, duration and tone. The alternation of two tunes gives enough variety to permit a dance to be extended for as long as desired. b

Ternary form
This form has three parts. In Western classical music a simple ternary form has a third section that is a recapitulation of the first (ABA). Often, the first section is repeated (AABA). This approach was popular in the 18th-century operatic aria, and was called da capo (i.e. "repeat from the top") form. Later, it gave rise to the 32-bar song, with the B section then often referred to as the "middle eight". A song has more need than a dance of a self-contained form with a beginning and an end of course.

Rondo form
This form has a recurring theme alternating with different (usually contrasting) sections called "episodes". It may be asymmetrical (ABACADAEA) or symmetrical (ABACABA). A recurring section, especially the main theme, is sometimes more thoroughly varied, or else one episode may be a "development" of it. A similar arrangement is the ritornello form of the Baroque concerto grosso. Arch form (ABCBA) resembles a symmetrical rondo without intermediate repetitions of the main theme. It is normally used in a round.

Variational form
Variational forms are those in which variation is an important formative element.

Theme and Variations: a theme, which in itself can be of any shorter form (binary, ternary, etc.), forms the only "section" and is repeated indefinitely (as in strophic form) but is varied each time (A, B, A, F, Z, A), so as to make a sort of sectional chain form. An important variant of this, much used in 17th-century British music and in the Passacaglia and Chaconne, was that of the ground bass – a repeating bass theme or basso ostinato over and around which the rest of the structure unfolds, often, but not always, spinning polyphonic or contrapuntal threads, or improvising divisions and descants. This is said by Scholes (1977) to be the form par excellence of unaccompanied or accompanied solo instrumental music. The Rondo is often found with sections varied (AA1BA2CA3BA4) or (ABA1CA2B1A).

Developmental form
Developmental forms are built directly from smaller units, such as motifs. A well-known Classical piece with a motif is Beethoven's fifth symphony, which starts with three short repeated notes and then a long note. In Classical pieces that are based on motifs, the motif is usually combined, varied and worked out in different ways, perhaps having a symmetrical or arch-like underpinning and a progressive development from beginning to end. By far the most important developmental form in Western classical music is Sonata form. This form, also known as sonata form, first movement form, compound binary, ternary and a variety of other names, developed from the binary-formed dance movement described above but is almost always cast in a greater ternary form having the nominal subdivisions of Exposition, Development and Recapitulation. Usually, but not always, the "A" parts (Exposition and Recapitulation, respectively) may be subdivided into two or three themes or theme groups which are taken asunder and recombined to form the "B" part (the development) – thus e. g. (AabB[dev. of a and/or b]A1ab1+coda). This developmental form is generally confined to certain sections of the piece, as to the middle section of the first movement of a sonata, though 19th-century composers such as Berlioz, Liszt and Wagner made valiant efforts to derive large-scale works purely or mainly from the motif.

History
Early history

A bone flute which is over 41,000 years old.
Prehistoric music can only be theorized based on findings from paleolithic archaeology sites. Flutes are often discovered, carved from bones in which lateral holes have been pierced; these are thought to have been blown at one end like the Japanese shakuhachi. The Divje Babe flute, carved from a cave bear femur, is thought to be at least 40,000 years old. Instruments such as the seven-holed flute and various types of stringed instruments, such as the Ravanahatha, have been recovered from the Indus Valley Civilization archaeological sites. India has one of the oldest musical traditions in the world—references to Indian classical music (marga) are found in the Vedas, ancient scriptures of the Hindu tradition. The earliest and largest collection of prehistoric musical instruments was found in China and dates back to between 7000 and 6600 BC. The "Hurrian Hymn to Nikkal", found on clay tablets that date back to approximately 1400 BC, is the oldest surviving notated work of music.

Ancient Egypt

Musicians of Amun, Tomb of Nakht, 18th Dynasty, Western Thebes
The ancient Egyptians credited one of their gods, Thoth, with the invention of music, with Osiris in turn used as part of his effort to civilize the world. The earliest material and representational evidence of Egyptian musical instruments dates to the Predynastic period, but the evidence is more securely attested in the Old Kingdom when harps, flutes and double clarinets were played. Percussion instruments, lyres and lutes were added to orchestras by the Middle Kingdom. Cymbals frequently accompanied music and dance, much as they still do in Egypt today. Egyptian folk music, including the traditional Sufi dhikr rituals, are the closest contemporary music genre to ancient Egyptian music, having preserved many of its features, rhythms and instruments.

Asian cultures

Indian women dressed in regional attire playing a variety of musical instruments popular in different parts of India
Gangubai Hangal
Durga

Indian classical music is one of the oldest musical traditions in the world. The Indus Valley civilization has sculptures that show dance and old musical instruments, like the seven holed flute. Various types of stringed instruments and drums have been recovered from Harappa and Mohenjo Daro by excavations carried out by Sir Mortimer Wheeler. The Rigveda has elements of present Indian music, with a musical notation to denote the metre and the mode of chanting. Indian classical music (marga) is monophonic, and based on a single melody line or raga rhythmically organized through talas. Silappadhikaram by Ilango Adigal provides information about how new scales can be formed by modal shifting of the tonic from an existing scale. Hindustani music was influenced by the Persian performance practices of the Afghan Mughals. Carnatic music, popular in the southern states, is largely devotional; the majority of the songs are addressed to the Hindu deities. There are also many songs emphasising love and other social issues.

Asian music covers the music cultures of Arabia, Central Asia, East Asia, South Asia, and Southeast Asia. Chinese classical music, the traditional art or court music of China, has a history stretching over around three thousand years. It has its own unique systems of musical notation, as well as musical tuning and pitch, musical instruments and styles or musical genres. Chinese music is pentatonic-diatonic, having a scale of twelve notes to an octave (5 + 7 = 12) as does European-influenced music. Persian music is the music of Persia and Persian language countries: musiqi, the science and art of music, and muzik, the sound and performance of music (Sakata 1983).

References in the Bible

"David with his harp" Paris Psalter,
c. 960, Constantinople
Music and theatre scholars studying the history and anthropology of Semitic and early Judeo-Christian culture have discovered common links in theatrical and musical activity between the classical cultures of the Hebrews and those of later Greeks and Romans. The common area of performance is found in a "social phenomenon called litany," a form of prayer consisting of a series of invocations or supplications. The Journal of Religion and Theatre notes that among the earliest forms of litany, "Hebrew litany was accompanied by a rich musical tradition:"

"While Genesis 4.21 identifies Jubal as the "father of all such as handle the harp and pipe," the Pentateuch is nearly silent about the practice and instruction of music in the early life of Israel. Then, in I Samuel 10 and the texts that follow, a curious thing happens. "One finds in the biblical text," writes Alfred Sendrey, "a sudden and unexplained upsurge of large choirs and orchestras, consisting of thoroughly organized and trained musical groups, which would be virtually inconceivable without lengthy, methodical preparation." This has led some scholars to believe that the prophet Samuel was the patriarch of a school, which taught not only prophets and holy men, but also sacred-rite musicians. This public music school, perhaps the earliest in recorded history, was not restricted to a priestly class—which is how the shepherd boy David appears on the scene as a minstrel to King Saul."
Ancient Greece
Melody sung in an approximation of Koine Greek pronunciation and in modern popular vocal style.
Problems playing this file? See media help.
Music was an important part of social and cultural life in ancient Greece. Musicians and singers played a prominent role in Greek theater. Mixed-gender choruses performed for entertainment, celebration, and spiritual ceremonies. Instruments included the double-reed aulos and a plucked string instrument, the lyre, principally the special kind called a kithara. Music was an important part of education, and boys were taught music starting at age six. Greek musical literacy created a flowering of music development. Greek music theory included the Greek musical modes, that eventually became the basis for Western religious and classical music. Later, influences from the Roman Empire, Eastern Europe, and the Byzantine Empire changed Greek music. The Seikilos epitaph is the oldest surviving example of a complete musical composition, including musical notation, from anywhere in the world. The oldest surviving work written on the subject of music theory is Harmonika Stoicheia by Aristoxenus.

Léonin or Pérotin
Breves dies hominis
Musical notation from a Catholic Missal, c. 1310–1320
The medieval era (476 to 1400), which took place during the Middle Ages, started with the introduction of monophonic (single melodic line) chanting into Roman Catholic Church services. Musical notation was used since Ancient times in Greek culture, but in the Middle Ages, notation was first introduced by the Catholic church so that the chant melodies could be written down, to facilitate the use of the same melodies for religious music across the entire Catholic empire. The only European Medieval repertory that has been found in written form from before 800 is the monophonic liturgical plainsong chant of the Roman Catholic Church, the central tradition of which was called Gregorian chant. Alongside these traditions of sacred and church music there existed a vibrant tradition of secular song (non-religious songs). Examples of composers from this period are Léonin, Pérotin, Guillaume de Machaut, and Walther von der Vogelweide.
Renaissance
T.L. de Victoria
Amicus meus
Allegory of Music, by Filippino Lippi
Renaissance music (c. 1400 to 1600) was more focused on secular (non-religious) themes, such as courtly love. Around 1450, the printing press was invented, which made printed sheet music much less expensive and easier to mass-produce (prior to the invention of the printing press, all notated music was hand-copied). The increased availability of sheet music helped to spread musical styles more quickly and across a larger area. Musicians and singers often worked for the church, courts and towns. Church choirs grew in size, and the church remained an important patron of music. By the middle of the 15th century, composers wrote richly polyphonic sacred music, in which different melody lines were interwoven simultaneously. Prominent composers from this era include Guillaume Dufay, Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina, Thomas Morley, and Orlande de Lassus. As musical activity shifted from the church to the aristocratic courts, kings, queens and princes competed for the finest composers. Many leading important composers came from the Netherlands, Belgium, and northern France. They are called the Franco-Flemish composers. They held important positions throughout Europe, especially in Italy. Other countries with vibrant musical activity included Germany, England, and Spain.
Baroque
J.S. Bach
Toccata and Fugue
The Baroque era of music took place from 1600 to 1750, as the Baroque artistic style flourished across Europe; and during this time, music expanded in its range and complexity. Baroque music began when the first operas (dramatic solo vocal music accompanied by orchestra) were written. During the Baroque era, polyphonic contrapuntal music, in which multiple, simultaneous independent melody lines were used, remained important (counterpoint was important in the vocal music of the Medieval era). German Baroque composers wrote for small ensembles including strings, brass, and woodwinds, as well as for choirs and keyboard instruments such as pipe organ, harpsichord, and clavichord. During this period several major music forms were defined that lasted into later periods when they were expanded and evolved further, including the fugue, the invention, the sonata, and the concerto. The late Baroque style was polyphonically complex and richly ornamented. Important composers from the Baroque era include Johann Sebastian Bach, George Frideric Handel, Georg Philipp Telemann and Antonio Lucio Vivaldi.
Classicism
W.A. Mozart
Symphony 40 g-moll
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart (seated at the keyboard) was a child prodigy virtuoso performer on the piano and violin. Even before he became a celebrated composer, he was widely known as a gifted performer and improviser.
The music of the Classical period (1730 to 1820) aimed to imitate what were seen as the key elements of the art and philosophy of Ancient Greece and Rome: the ideals of balance, proportion and disciplined expression. (Note: the music from the Classical period should not be confused with Classical music in general, a term which refers to Western art music from the 5th century to the 2000s, which includes the Classical period as one of a number of periods). Music from the Classical period has a lighter, clearer and considerably simpler texture than the Baroque music which preceded it. The main style was homophony, where a prominent melody and a subordinate chordal accompaniment part are clearly distinct. Classical instrumental melodies tended to be almost voicelike and singable. New genres were developed, and the fortepiano, the forerunner to the modern piano, replaced the Baroque era harpsichord and pipe organ as the main keyboard instrument.
Importance was given to instrumental music. It was dominated by further development of musical forms initially defined in the Baroque period: the sonata, the concerto, and the symphony. Others main kinds were the trio, string quartet, serenade and divertimento. The sonata was the most important and developed form. Although Baroque composers also wrote sonatas, the Classical style of sonata is completely distinct. All of the main instrumental forms of the Classical era, from string quartets to symphonies and concertos, were based on the structure of the sonata. The instruments used chamber music and orchestra became more standardized. In place of the basso continuo group of the Baroque era, which consisted of harpsichord, organ or lute along with a number of bass instruments selected at the discretion of the group leader (e.g., viol, cello, theorbo, serpent), Classical chamber groups used specified, standardized instruments (e.g., a string quartet would be performed by two violins, a viola and a cello). The Baroque era improvised chord-playing of the continuo keyboardist or lute player was gradually phased out between 1750 and 1800.
One of the most important changes made in the Classical period was the development of public concerts. The aristocracy still played a significant role in the sponsorship of concerts and compositions, but it was now possible for composers to survive without being permanent employees of queens or princes. The increasing popularity of classical music led to a growth in the number and types of orchestras. The expansion of orchestral concerts necessitated the building of large public performance spaces. Symphonic music including symphonies, musical accompaniment to ballet and mixed vocal/instrumental genres such as opera and oratorio became more popular.
The best known composers of Classicism are Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach, Christoph Willibald Gluck, Johann Christian Bach, Joseph Haydn, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Ludwig van Beethoven and Franz Schubert. Beethoven and Schubert are also considered to be composers in the later part of the Classical era, as it began to move towards Romanticism.

Romanticism

The piano was the centrepiece of social activity for middle-class urbanites in the 19th century (Moritz von Schwind, 1868). The man at the piano is composer Franz Schubert.
R. Wagner
Die Walküre

Romantic music (c. 1810 to 1900) from the 19th century had many elements in common with the Romantic styles in literature and painting of the era. Romanticism was an artistic, literary, and intellectual movement was characterized by its emphasis on emotion and individualism as well as glorification of all the past and nature. Romantic music expanded beyond the rigid styles and forms of the Classical era into more passionate, dramatic expressive pieces and songs. Romantic composers such as Wagner and Brahms attempted to increase emotional expression and power in their music to describe deeper truths or human feelings. With symphonic tone poems, composers tried to tell stories and evoke images or landscapes using instrumental music. Some composers promoted nationalistic pride with patriotic orchestral music inspired by folk music. The emotional and expressive qualities of music came to take precedence over tradition.

Romantic composers grew in idiosyncrasy, and went further in the syncretism of exploring different art-forms in a musical context, (such as literature), history (historical figures and legends), or nature itself. Romantic love or longing was a prevalent theme in many works composed during this period. In some cases the formal structures from the classical period continued to be used (e.g., the sonata form used in string quartets and symphonies), but these forms were expanded and altered. In many cases, new approaches were explored for existing genres, forms, and functions. Also, new forms were created that were deemed better suited to the new subject matter. Composers continued to develop opera and ballet music, exploring new styles and themes.

In the years after 1800, the music developed by Ludwig van Beethoven and Franz Schubert introduced a more dramatic, expressive style. In Beethoven's case, short motifs, developed organically, came to replace melody as the most significant compositional unit (an example is the distinctive four note figure used in his Fifth Symphony). Later Romantic composers such as Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky, Antonín Dvořák, and Gustav Mahler used more unusual chords and more dissonance to create dramatic tension. They generated complex and often much longer musical works. During the late Romantic period, composers explored dramatic chromatic alterations of tonality, such as extended chords and altered chords, which created new sound "colours". The late 19th century saw a dramatic expansion in the size of the orchestra, and the industrial revolution helped to create better instruments, creating a more powerful sound. Public concerts became an important part of well-to-do urban society. It also saw a new diversity in theatre music, including operetta, and musical comedy and other forms of musical theatre.

20th- and 21st-century music
In the 19th century, one of the key ways that new compositions became known to the public was by the sales of sheet music, which middle class amateur music lovers would perform at home on their piano or other common instruments, such as violin. With 20th-century music, the invention of new electric technologies such as radio broadcasting and the mass market availability of gramophone records meant that sound recordings of songs and pieces heard by listeners (either on the radio or on their record player) became the main way to learn about new songs and pieces. There was a vast increase in music listening as the radio gained popularity and phonographs were used to replay and distribute music, because whereas in the 19th century, the focus on sheet music restricted access to new music to the middle class and upper-class people who could read music and who owned pianos and instruments, in the 20th century, anyone with a radio or record player could hear operas, symphonies and big bands right in their own living room. This allowed lower-income people, who would never be able to afford an opera or symphony concert ticket to hear this music. It also meant that people could hear music from different parts of the country, or even different parts of the world, even if they could not afford to travel to these locations. This helped to spread musical styles.

The focus of art music in the 20th century was characterized by exploration of new rhythms, styles, and sounds. The horrors of World War I influenced many of the arts, including music, and some composers began exploring darker, harsher sounds. Traditional music styles such as jazz and folk music were used by composers as a source of ideas for classical music. Igor Stravinsky, Arnold Schoenberg, and John Cage were all influential composers in 20th-century art music. The invention of sound recording and the ability to edit music gave rise to new subgenre of classical music, including the acousmatic and Musique concrète schools of electronic composition. Sound recording was also a major influence on the development of popular music genres, because it enabled recordings of songs and bands to be widely distributed. The introduction of the multitrack recording system had a major influence on rock music, because it could do much more than record a band's performance. Using a multitrack system, a band and their music producer could overdub many layers of instrument tracks and vocals, creating new sounds that would not be possible in a live performance.

Jazz evolved and became an important genre of music over the course of the 20th century, and during the second half of that century, rock music did the same. Jazz is an American musical artform that originated in the beginning of the 20th century in African American communities in the Southern United States from a confluence of African and European music traditions. The style's West African pedigree is evident in its use of blue notes, improvisation, polyrhythms, syncopation, and the swung note.

Rock music is a genre of popular music that developed in the 1960s from 1950s rock and roll, rockabilly, blues, and country music. The sound of rock often revolves around the electric guitar or acoustic guitar, and it uses a strong back beat laid down by a rhythm section of electric bass guitar, drums, and keyboard instruments such as organ, piano, or, since the 1970s, analog synthesizers and digital ones and computers since the 1990s. Along with the guitar or keyboards, saxophone and blues-style harmonica are used as soloing instruments. In its "purest form," it "has three chords, a strong, insistent back beat, and a catchy melody."

Performance

Chinese Naxi musicians

Assyrians playing zurna and Davul, instruments that go back thousands of years.
Performance is the physical expression of music, which occurs when a song is sung or when a piano piece, electric guitar melody, symphony, drum beat or other musical part is played by musicians. In classical music, a musical work is written in music notation by a composer and then it is performed once the composer is satisfied with its structure and instrumentation. However, as it gets performed, the interpretation of a song or piece can evolve and change. In classical music, instrumental performers, singers or conductors may gradually make changes to the phrasing or tempo of a piece. In popular and traditional music, the performers have a lot more freedom to make changes to the form of a song or piece. As such, in popular and traditional music styles, even when a band plays a cover song, they can make changes to it such as adding a guitar solo to or inserting an introduction.

A performance can either be planned out and rehearsed (practiced)—which is the norm in classical music, with jazz big bands and many popular music styles–or improvised over a chord progression (a sequence of chords), which is the norm in small jazz and blues groups. Rehearsals of orchestras, concert bands and choirs are led by a conductor. Rock, blues and jazz bands are usually led by the bandleader. A rehearsal is a structured repetition of a song or piece by the performers until it can be sung and/or played correctly and, if it is a song or piece for more than one musician, until the parts are together from a rhythmic and tuning perspective. Improvisation is the creation of a musical idea–a melody or other musical line–created on the spot, often based on scales or pre-existing melodic riffs.

Many cultures have strong traditions of solo performance (in which one singer or instrumentalist performs), such as in Indian classical music, and in the Western art-music tradition. Other cultures, such as in Bali, include strong traditions of group performance. All cultures include a mixture of both, and performance may range from improvised solo playing to highly planned and organised performances such as the modern classical concert, religious processions, classical music festivals or music competitions. Chamber music, which is music for a small ensemble with only a few of each type of instrument, is often seen as more intimate than large symphonic works.

Oral and aural tradition
Many types of music, such as traditional blues and folk music were not written down in sheet music; instead, they were originally preserved in the memory of performers, and the songs were handed down orally, from one musician or singer to another, or aurally, in which a performer learns a song "by ear". When the composer of a song or piece is no longer known, this music is often classified as "traditional" or as a "folk song". Different musical traditions have different attitudes towards how and where to make changes to the original source material, from quite strict, to those that demand improvisation or modification to the music. A culture's history and stories may also be passed on by ear through song.

Ornamentation

In a score or on a performer's music part, this sign indicates that the musician should perform a trill—a rapid alternation between two notes. About this sound Play
In music, an "ornament" is a decoration to a melody, bassline or other musical part. The detail included explicitly in the music notation varies between genres and historical periods. In general, art music notation from the 17th through the 19th centuries required performers to have a great deal of contextual knowledge about performing styles. For example, in the 17th and 18th centuries, music notated for solo performers typically indicated a simple, unadorned melody. However, performers were expected to know how to add stylistically appropriate ornaments to add interest to the music, such as trills and turns.

In the 19th century, art music for solo performers may give a general instruction such as to perform the music expressively, without describing in detail how the performer should do this. The performer was expected to know how to use tempo changes, accentuation, and pauses (among other devices) to obtain this "expressive" performance style. In the 20th century, art music notation often became more explicit and used a range of markings and annotations to indicate to performers how they should play or sing the piece.

Philosophy and aesthetics

A painting by Boldini of a woman playing the piano.
Philosophy of music is a subfield of philosophy. The philosophy of music is the study of fundamental questions regarding music. The philosophical study of music has many connections with philosophical questions in metaphysics and aesthetics. Some basic questions in the philosophy of music are:

What is the definition of music? (What are the necessary and sufficient conditions for classifying something as music?)
What is the relationship between music and mind?
What does musical history reveal to us about the world?
What is the connection between music and emotions?
What is meaning in relation to music?
In ancient times, such as with the Ancient Greeks, the aesthetics of music explored the mathematical and cosmological dimensions of rhythmic and harmonic organization. In the 18th century, focus shifted to the experience of hearing music, and thus to questions about its beauty and human enjoyment (plaisir and jouissance) of music. The origin of this philosophic shift is sometimes attributed to Baumgarten in the 18th century, followed by Kant. Through their writing, the ancient term 'aesthetics', meaning sensory perception, received its present-day connotation. In the 2000s, philosophers have tended to emphasize issues besides beauty and enjoyment. For example, music's capacity to express emotion has been a central issue.
In the 20th century, important contributions were made by Peter Kivy, Jerrold Levinson, Roger Scruton, and Stephen Davies. However, many musicians, music critics, and other non-philosophers have contributed to the aesthetics of music. In the 19th century, a significant debate arose between Eduard Hanslick, a music critic and musicologist, and composer Richard Wagner regarding whether music can express meaning. Harry Partch and some other musicologists, such as Kyle Gann, have studied and tried to popularize microtonal music and the usage of alternate musical scales. Also many modern composers like La Monte Young, Rhys Chatham and Glenn Branca paid much attention to a scale called just intonation.
It is often thought that music has the ability to affect our emotions, intellect, and psychology; it can assuage our loneliness or incite our passions. The philosopher Plato suggests in the Republic that music has a direct effect on the soul. Therefore, he proposes that in the ideal regime music would be closely regulated by the state. (Book VII)
There has been a strong tendency in the aesthetics of music to emphasize the paramount importance of compositional structure; however, other issues concerning the aesthetics of music include lyricism, harmony, hypnotism, emotiveness, temporal dynamics, resonance, playfulness, and color (see also musical development).
Modern music psychology aims to explain and understand musical behavior and experience. Research in this field and its subfields are primarily empirical; their knowledge tends to advance on the basis of interpretations of data collected by systematic observation of and interaction with human participants. In addition to its focus on fundamental perceptions and cognitive processes, music psychology is a field of research with practical relevance for many areas, including music performance, composition, education, criticism, and therapy, as well as investigations of human aptitude, skill, intelligence, creativity, and social behavior.
Cognitive neuroscience of music
The primary auditory cortex is one of the main areas associated with superior pitch resolution.
Cognitive neuroscience of music is the scientific study of brain-based mechanisms involved in the cognitive processes underlying music. These behaviours include music listening, performing, composing, reading, writing, and ancillary activities. It also is increasingly concerned with the brain basis for musical aesthetics and musical emotion. The field is distinguished by its reliance on direct observations of the brain, using such techniques as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), magnetoencephalography (MEG), electroencephalography (EEG), and positron emission tomography (PET).

Cognitive musicology is a branch of cognitive science concerned with computationally modeling musical knowledge with the goal of understanding both music and cognition. The use of computer models provides an exacting, interactive medium in which to formulate and test theories and has roots in artificial intelligence and cognitive science.

This interdisciplinary field investigates topics such as the parallels between language and music in the brain. Biologically inspired models of computation are often included in research, such as neural networks and evolutionary programs. This field seeks to model how musical knowledge is represented, stored, perceived, performed, and generated. By using a well-structured computer environment, the systematic structures of these cognitive phenomena can be investigated.
Psychoacoustics is the scientific study of sound perception. More specifically, it is the branch of science studying the psychological and physiological responses associated with sound (including speech and music). It can be further categorized as a branch of psychophysics.
Evolutionary musicology concerns the "origins of music, the question of animal song, selection pressures underlying music evolution", and "music evolution and human evolution". It seeks to understand music perception and activity in the context of evolutionary theory. Charles Darwin speculated that music may have held an adaptive advantage and functioned as a protolanguage, a view which has spawned several competing theories of music evolution. An alternate view sees music as a by-product of linguistic evolution; a type of "auditory cheesecake" that pleases the senses without providing any adaptive function. This view has been directly countered by numerous music researchers.

Culture in music cognition
An individual's culture or ethnicity plays a role in their music cognition, including their preferences, emotional reaction, and musical memory. Musical preferences are biased toward culturally familiar musical traditions beginning in infancy, and adults' classification of the emotion of a musical piece depends on both culturally specific and universal structural features. Additionally, individuals' musical memory abilities are greater for culturally familiar music than for culturally unfamiliar music.
This Song Dynasty (960–1279) painting, entitled the "Night Revels of Han Xizai," shows Chinese musicians entertaining guests at a party in a 10th-century household.
Many ethnographic studies demonstrate that music is a participatory, community-based activity. Music is experienced by individuals in a range of social settings ranging from being alone to attending a large concert, forming a music community, which cannot be understood as a function of individual will or accident; it includes both commercial and non-commercial participants with a shared set of common values. Musical performances take different forms in different cultures and socioeconomic milieus. In Europe and North America, there is often a divide between what types of music are viewed as a "high culture" and "low culture." "High culture" types of music typically include Western art music such as Baroque, Classical, Romantic, and modern-era symphonies, concertos, and solo works, and are typically heard in formal concerts in concert halls and churches, with the audience sitting quietly in seats.

Other types of music—including, but not limited to, jazz, blues, soul, and country—are often performed in bars, nightclubs, and theatres, where the audience may be able to drink, dance, and express themselves by cheering. Until the later 20th century, the division between "high" and "low" musical forms was widely accepted as a valid distinction that separated out better quality, more advanced "art music" from the popular styles of music heard in bars and dance halls.

However, in the 1980s and 1990s, musicologists studying this perceived divide between "high" and "low" musical genres argued that this distinction is not based on the musical value or quality of the different types of music. Rather, they argued that this distinction was based largely on the socioeconomics standing or social class of the performers or audience of the different types of music. For example, whereas the audience for Classical symphony concerts typically have above-average incomes, the audience for a rap concert in an inner-city area may have below-average incomes. Even though the performers, audience, or venue where non-"art" music is performed may have a lower socioeconomic status, the music that is performed, such as blues, rap, punk, funk, or ska may be very complex and sophisticated.

When composers introduce styles of music that break with convention, there can be a strong resistance from academic music experts and popular culture. Late-period Beethoven string quartets, Stravinsky ballet scores, serialism, bebop-era jazz, hip hop, punk rock, and electronica have all been considered non-music by some critics when they were first introduced. Such themes are examined in the sociology of music. The sociological study of music, sometimes called sociomusicology, is often pursued in departments of sociology, media studies, or music, and is closely related to the field of ethnomusicology.
Nineteenth-century composer and pianist Clara Schumann.
Women have played a major role in music throughout history, as composers, songwriters, instrumental performers, singers, conductors, music scholars, music educators, music critics/music journalists and other musical professions. As well, it describes music movements, events and genres related to women, women's issues and feminism. In the 2010s, while women comprise a significant proportion of popular music and classical music singers, and a significant proportion of songwriters (many of them being singer-songwriters), there are few women record producers, rock critics and rock instrumentalists. Although there have been a huge number of women composers in classical music, from the Medieval period to the present day, women composers are significantly underrepresented in the commonly performed classical music repertoire, music history textbooks and music encyclopedias; for example, in the Concise Oxford History of Music, Clara Schumann is one of the only female composers who is mentioned.

Women comprise a significant proportion of instrumental soloists in classical music and the percentage of women in orchestras is increasing. A 2015 article on concerto soloists in major Canadian orchestras, however, indicated that 84% of the soloists with the Orchestre Symphonique de Montreal were men. In 2012, women still made up just 6% of the top-ranked Vienna Philharmonic orchestra. Women are less common as instrumental players in popular music genres such as rock and heavy metal, although there have been a number of notable female instrumentalists and all-female bands. Women are particularly underrepresented in extreme metal genres. In the 1960s pop music scene, "[l]ike most aspects of the...music business, [in the 1960s,] songwriting was a male-dominated field. Though there were plenty of female singers on the radio, women ...were primarily seen as consumers:... Singing was sometimes an acceptable pastime for a girl, but playing an instrument, writing songs, or producing records simply wasn't done." Young women "...were not socialized to see themselves as people who create [music]."

Women are also underrepresented in orchestral conducting, music criticism/music journalism, music producing, and sound engineering. While women were discouraged from composing in the 19th century, and there are few women musicologists, women became involved in music education "...to such a degree that women dominated [this field] during the later half of the 19th century and well into the 20th century."

According to Jessica Duchen, a music writer for London's The Independent, women musicians in classical music are "...too often judged for their appearances, rather than their talent" and they face pressure "...to look sexy onstage and in photos." Duchen states that while "[t]here are women musicians who refuse to play on their looks,...the ones who do tend to be more materially successful." According to the UK's Radio 3 editor, Edwina Wolstencroft, the music industry has long been open to having women in performance or entertainment roles, but women are much less likely to have positions of authority, such as being the leader of an orchestra. In popular music, while there are many women singers recording songs, there are very few women behind the audio console acting as music producers, the individuals who direct and manage the recording process. One of the most recorded artists is Asha Bhosle, an Indian singer best known as a playback singer in Hindi cinema.
Music production in the 2000s using a digital audio workstation (DAW) with an electronic keyboard and a multi-monitor set-up.
The music that composers make can be heard through several media; the most traditional way is to hear it live, in the presence of the musicians (or as one of the musicians), in an outdoor or indoor space such as an amphitheatre, concert hall, cabaret room or theatre. Since the 20th century, live music can also be broadcast over the radio, television or the Internet, or recorded and listened to on a CD player or Mp3 player. Some musical styles focus on producing a sound for a performance, while others focus on producing a recording that mixes together sounds that were never played "live." Recording, even of essentially live styles such as rock, often uses the ability to edit and splice to produce recordings that may be considered "better" than the actual performance.
Technology has had an influence on music since prehistoric times, when cave people used simple tools to bore holes into bone flutes 41,000 years ago. Technology continued to influence music throughout the history of music, as it enabled new instruments and music notation reproduction systems to be used, with one of the watershed moments in music notation being the invention of the printing press in the 1400s, which meant music scores no longer had to be hand copied. In the 19th century, music technology led to the development of a more powerful, louder piano and led to the development of new valves brass instruments. In the early 20th century (in the late 1920s), as talking pictures emerged in the early 20th century, with their prerecorded musical tracks, an increasing number of moviehouse orchestra musicians found themselves out of work. During the 1920s live musical performances by orchestras, pianists, and theater organists were common at first-run theaters. With the coming of the talking motion pictures, those featured performances were largely eliminated. The American Federation of Musicians (AFM) took out newspaper advertisements protesting the replacement of live musicians with mechanical playing devices. One 1929 ad that appeared in the Pittsburgh Press features an image of a can labeled "Canned Music / Big Noise Brand / Guaranteed to Produce No Intellectual or Emotional Reaction Whatever"
Since legislation introduced to help protect performers, composers, publishers and producers, including the Audio Home Recording Act of 1992 in the United States, and the 1979 revised Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works in the United Kingdom, recordings and live performances have also become more accessible through computers, devices and Internet in a form that is commonly known as Music-On-Demand.
In many cultures, there is less distinction between performing and listening to music, since virtually everyone is involved in some sort of musical activity, often communal. In industrialized countries, listening to music through a recorded form, such as sound recording or watching a music video, became more common than experiencing live performance, roughly in the middle of the 20th century.
Sometimes, live performances incorporate prerecorded sounds. For example, a disc jockey uses disc records for scratching, and some 20th-century works have a solo for an instrument or voice that is performed along with music that is prerecorded onto a tape. Computers and many keyboards can be programmed to produce and play Musical Instrument Digital Interface (MIDI) music. Audiences can also become performers by participating in karaoke, an activity of Japanese origin centered on a device that plays voice-eliminated versions of well-known songs. Most karaoke machines also have video screens that show lyrics to songs being performed; performers can follow the lyrics as they sing over the instrumental tracks.
The advent of the Internet and widespread high-speed broadband access has transformed the experience of music, partly through the increased ease of access to recordings of music via streaming video and vastly increased choice of music for consumers. Chris Anderson, in his book The Long Tail: Why the Future of Business Is Selling Less of More, suggests that while the traditional economic model of supply and demand describes scarcity, the Internet retail model is based on abundance. Digital storage costs are low, so a company can afford to make its whole recording inventory available online, giving customers as much choice as possible. It has thus become economically viable to offer music recordings that very few people are interested in. Consumers' growing awareness of their increased choice results in a closer association between listening tastes and social identity, and the creation of thousands of niche markets.
Another effect of the Internet arose with online communities and social media websites like YouTube and Facebook, a social networking service. These sites make it easier for aspiring singers and amateur bands to distribute videos of their songs, connect with other musicians, and gain audience interest. Professional musicians also use YouTube as a free publisher of promotional material. YouTube users, for example, no longer only download and listen to MP3s, but also actively create their own. According to Don Tapscott and Anthony D. Williams, in their book Wikinomics, there has been a shift from a traditional consumer role to what they call a "prosumer" role, a consumer who both creates content and consumes. Manifestations of this in music include the production of mashes, remixes, and music videos by fans.
The music industry refers to the businesses connected with the creation and sale of music. It consists of songwriters and composers who create new songs and musical pieces, music producers and sound engineers who record songs and pieces, record labels and publishers that distribute recorded music products and sheet music internationally and that often control the rights to those products. Some music labels are "independent," while others are subsidiaries of larger corporate entities or international media groups. In the 2000s, the increasing popularity of listening to music as digital music files on MP3 players, iPods, or computers, and of trading music on file sharing websites or buying it online in the form of digital files had a major impact on the traditional music business. Many smaller independent CD stores went out of business as music buyers decreased their purchases of CDs, and many labels had lower CD sales. Some companies did well with the change to a digital format, though, such as Apple's iTunes, an online music store that sells digital files of songs over the Internet.
In spite of some international copyright treaties, determining which music is in the public domain is complicated by the variety of national copyright laws that may be applicable. US copyright law formerly protected printed music published after 1923 for 28 years and with renewal for another 28 years, but the Copyright Act of 1976 made renewal automatic, and the Digital Millennium Copyright Act changed the calculation of the copyright term to 70 years after the death of the creator. Recorded sound falls under mechanical licensing, often covered by a confusing patchwork of state laws; most cover versions are licensed through the Harry Fox Agency. Performance rights may be obtained by either performers or the performance venue; the two major organizations for licensing are BMI and ASCAP. Two online sources for public domain music are IMSLP (International Music Score Library Project) and Choral Public Domain Library (CPDL).
Education
Non-professional
A Suzuki violin recital with students of varying ages.
The incorporation of some music or singing training into general education from preschool to post secondary education is common in North America and Europe. Involvement in playing and singing music is thought to teach basic skills such as concentration, counting, listening, and cooperation while also promoting understanding of language, improving the ability to recall information, and creating an environment more conducive to learning in other areas. In elementary schools, children often learn to play instruments such as the recorder, sing in small choirs, and learn about the history of Western art music and traditional music. Some elementary school children also learn about popular music styles. In religious schools, children sing hymns and other religious music. In secondary schools (and less commonly in elementary schools), students may have the opportunity to perform in some types of musical ensembles, such as choirs (a group of singers), marching bands, concert bands, jazz bands, or orchestras. In some school systems, music lessons on how to play instruments may be provided. Some students also take private music lessons after school with a singing teacher or instrument teacher. Amateur musicians typically learn basic musical rudiments (e.g., learning about musical notation for musical scales and rhythms) and beginner- to intermediate-level singing or instrument-playing techniques.
At the university level, students in most arts and humanities programs can receive credit for taking a few music courses, which typically take the form of an overview course on the history of music, or a music appreciation course that focuses on listening to music and learning about different musical styles. In addition, most North American and European universities have some types of musical ensembles that students in arts and humanities are able to participate in, such as choirs, marching bands, concert bands, or orchestras. The study of Western art music is increasingly common outside of North America and Europe, such as the Indonesian Institute of the Arts in Yogyakarta, Indonesia, or the classical music programs that are available in Asian countries such as South Korea, Japan, and China. At the same time, Western universities and colleges are widening their curriculum to include music of non-Western cultures, such as the music of Africa or Bali (e.g. Gamelan music).
Manhattan School of Music professor and professional double bass player Timothy Cobb teaching a bass lesson in the late 2000s. His bass has a low C extension with a metal "machine" with buttons for playing the pitches on the extension.
Individuals aiming to become professional musicians, singers, composers, songwriters, music teachers and practitioners of other music-related professions such as music history professors, sound engineers, and so on study in specialized post-secondary programs offered by colleges, universities and music conservatories. Some institutions that train individuals for careers in music offer training in a wide range of professions, as is the case with many of the top U.S. universities, which offer degrees in music performance (including singing and playing instruments), music history, music theory, music composition, music education (for individuals aiming to become elementary or high school music teachers) and, in some cases, conducting. On the other hand, some small colleges may only offer training in a single profession (e.g., sound recording).
While most university and conservatory music programs focus on training students in classical music, there are a number of universities and colleges that train musicians for careers as jazz or popular music musicians and composers, with notable U.S. examples including the Manhattan School of Music and the Berklee College of Music. Two important schools in Canada which offer professional jazz training are McGill University and Humber College. Individuals aiming at careers in some types of music, such as heavy metal music, country music or blues are less likely to become professionals by completing degrees or diplomas in colleges or universities. Instead, they typically learn about their style of music by singing and/or playing in many bands (often beginning in amateur bands, cover bands and tribute bands), studying recordings available on CD, DVD and the Internet and working with already-established professionals in their style of music, either through informal mentoring or regular music lessons. Since the 2000s, the increasing popularity and availability of Internet forums and YouTube "how-to" videos have enabled many singers and musicians from metal, blues and similar genres to improve their skills. Many pop, rock and country singers train informally with vocal coaches and singing teachers.
Undergraduate university degrees in music, including the Bachelor of Music, the Bachelor of Music Education, and the Bachelor of Arts (with a major in music) typically take about four years to complete. These degrees provide students with a grounding in music theory and music history, and many students also study an instrument or learn singing technique as part of their program. Graduates of undergraduate music programs can seek employment or go on to further study in music graduate programs. Bachelor's degree graduates are also eligible to apply to some graduate programs and professional schools outside of music (e.g., public administration, business administration, library science, and, in some jurisdictions, teacher's college, law school or medical school).
Graduate music degrees include the Master of Music, the Master of Arts (in musicology, music theory or another music field), the Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) (e.g., in musicology or music theory), and more recently, the Doctor of Musical Arts, or DMA. The Master of Music degree, which takes one to two years to complete, is typically awarded to students studying the performance of an instrument, education, voice (singing) or composition. The Master of Arts degree, which takes one to two years to complete and often requires a thesis, is typically awarded to students studying musicology, music history, music theory or ethnomusicology.
The PhD, which is required for students who want to work as university professors in musicology, music history, or music theory, takes three to five years of study after the master's degree, during which time the student will complete advanced courses and undertake research for a dissertation. The DMA is a relatively new degree that was created to provide a credential for professional performers or composers that want to work as university professors in musical performance or composition. The DMA takes three to five years after a master's degree, and includes advanced courses, projects, and performances. In Medieval times, the study of music was one of the Quadrivium of the seven Liberal Arts and considered vital to higher learning. Within the quantitative Quadrivium, music, or more accurately harmonics, was the study of rational proportions.
Musicology, the academic study of the subject of music, is studied in universities and music conservatories. The earliest definitions from the 19th century defined three sub-disciplines of musicology: systematic musicology, historical musicology, and comparative musicology or ethnomusicology. In 2010-era scholarship, one is more likely to encounter a division of the discipline into music theory, music history, and ethnomusicology. Research in musicology has often been enriched by cross-disciplinary work, for example in the field of psychoacoustics. The study of music of non-Western cultures, and the cultural study of music, is called ethnomusicology. Students can pursue the undergraduate study of musicology, ethnomusicology, music history, and music theory through several different types of degrees, including bachelor's degrees, master's degrees and PhD degrees.
Music theory is the study of music, generally in a highly technical manner outside of other disciplines. More broadly it refers to any study of music, usually related in some form with compositional concerns, and may include mathematics, physics, and anthropology. What is most commonly taught in beginning music theory classes are guidelines to write in the style of the common practice period, or tonal music. Theory, even of music of the common practice period, may take many other forms. Musical set theory is the application of mathematical set theory to music, first applied to atonal music. Speculative music theory, contrasted with analytic music theory, is devoted to the analysis and synthesis of music materials, for example tuning systems, generally as preparation for composition.
Zoomusicology is the study of the music of non-human animals, or the musical aspects of sounds produced by non-human animals. As George Herzog (1941) asked, "do animals have music?" François-Bernard Mâche's Musique, mythe, nature, ou les Dauphins d'Arion (1983), a study of "ornitho-musicology" using a technique of Nicolas Ruwet's Langage, musique, poésie (1972) paradigmatic segmentation analysis, shows that bird songs are organised according to a repetition-transformation principle. Jean-Jacques Nattiez (1990), argues that "in the last analysis, it is a human being who decides what is and is not musical, even when the sound is not of human origin. If we acknowledge that sound is not organised and conceptualised (that is, made to form music) merely by its producer, but by the mind that perceives it, then music is uniquely human."
Ethnomusicologist Frances Densmore recording Blackfoot chief Mountain Chief for the Bureau of American Ethnology (1916)
In the West, much of the history of music that is taught deals with the Western civilization's art music, which is known as classical music. The history of music in non-Western cultures ("world music" or the field of "ethnomusicology"), which typically covers music from Africa and Asia is also taught in Western universities. This includes the documented classical traditions of Asian countries outside the influence of Western Europe, as well as the folk or indigenous music of various other cultures. Popular or folk styles of music in non-Western countries varied widely from culture to culture, and from period to period. Different cultures emphasised different instruments, techniques, singing styles and uses for music. Music has been used for entertainment, ceremonies, rituals, religious purposes and for practical and artistic communication. Non-Western music has also been used for propaganda purposes, as was the case with Chinese opera during the Cultural Revolution.
There is a host of music classifications for non-Western music, many of which are caught up in the argument over the definition of music. Among the largest of these is the division between classical music (or "art" music), and popular music (or commercial music – including non-Western styles of rock, country, and pop music-related styles). Some genres do not fit neatly into one of these "big two" classifications, (such as folk music, world music, or jazz-related music).
As world cultures have come into greater global contact, their indigenous musical styles have often merged with other styles, which produces new styles. For example, the United States bluegrass style contains elements from Anglo-Irish, Scottish, Irish, German and African instrumental and vocal traditions, which were able to fuse in the United States' multi-ethnic "melting pot" society. Some types of world music contain a mixture of non-Western indigenous styles with Western pop music elements. Genres of music are determined as much by tradition and presentation as by the actual music. Some works, like George Gershwin's Rhapsody in Blue, are claimed by both jazz and classical music, while Gershwin's Porgy and Bess and Leonard Bernstein's West Side Story are claimed by both opera and the Broadway musical tradition. Many current music festivals for non-Western music include bands and singers from a particular musical genre, such as world music.
Indian music, for example, is one of the oldest and longest living types of music, and is still widely heard and performed in South Asia, as well as internationally (especially since the 1960s). Indian music has mainly three forms of classical music, Hindustani, Carnatic, and Dhrupad styles. It has also a large repertoire of styles, which involve only percussion music such as the talavadya performances famous in South India.
Music therapy
A music therapist from a "Blues in the Schools" program plays harmonica with a US Navy sailor at a Naval Therapy Center.
Music therapy is an interpersonal process in which a trained therapist uses music and all of its facets—physical, emotional, mental, social, aesthetic, and spiritual—to help clients to improve or maintain their health. In some instances, the client's needs are addressed directly through music; in others they are addressed through the relationships that develop between the client and therapist. Music therapy is used with individuals of all ages and with a variety of conditions, including: psychiatric disorders, medical problems, physical disabilities, sensory impairments, developmental disabilities, substance abuse issues, communication disorders, interpersonal problems, and aging. It is also used to improve learning, build self-esteem, reduce stress, support physical exercise, and facilitate a host of other health-related activities. Music therapists may encourage clients to sing, play instruments, create songs, or do other musical activities.
One of the earliest mentions of music therapy was in Al-Farabi's (c. 872–950) treatise Meanings of the Intellect, which described the therapeutic effects of music on the soul. Music has long been used to help people deal with their emotions. In the 17th century, the scholar Robert Burton's The Anatomy of Melancholy argued that music and dance were critical in treating mental illness, especially melancholia. He noted that music has an "excellent power ...to expel many other diseases" and he called it "a sovereign remedy against despair and melancholy." He pointed out that in Antiquity, Canus, a Rhodian fiddler, used music to "make a melancholy man merry, ...a lover more enamoured, a religious man more devout." In the Ottoman Empire, mental illnesses were treated with music. In November 2006, Dr. Michael J. Crawford and his colleagues also found that music therapy helped schizophrenic patients.
Albert Einstein had a lifelong love of music (particularly the works of Bach and Mozart), once stating that life without playing music would be inconceivable to him. In some interviews Einstein even attributed much of his scientific intuition to music, with his son Hans recounting that "whenever he felt that he had come to the end of the road or into a difficult situation in his work, he would take refuge in music, and that would usually resolve all his difficulties." Something in the music, according to Michele and Robert Root-Bernstein in Psychology Today, "would guide his thoughts in new and creative directions." It has been said that Einstein considered Mozart's music to reveal a universal harmony that Einstein believed existed in the universe, "as if the great Wolfgang Amadeus did not 'create' his beautifully clear music at all, but simply discovered it already made. This perspective parallels, remarkably, Einstein’s views on the ultimate simplicity of nature and its explanation and statement via essentially simple mathematical expressions." A review suggests that music may be effective for improving subjective sleep quality in adults with insomnia symptoms.
Music theory is the study of the practices and possibilities of music. The Oxford
Companion to Music describes three interrelated uses of the term "music theory":
The first is what is otherwise called 'rudiments', currently taught as
the elements of notation, of key signatures, of time signatures, of
rhythmic notation, and so on. [...] The second is the study of writings
about music from ancient times onwards. [...] The third is an area of
current musicological study that seeks to define processes and
general principles in music — a sphere of research that can be
distinguished from analysis in that it takes as its starting-point not
the individual work or performance but the fundamental materials
from which it is built.
Music theory is frequently concerned with describing how musicians and composers
make music, including tuning systems and composition methods among other topics.
Because of the ever-expanding conception of what constitutes music (see Definition
of music), a more inclusive definition could be that music theory is the consideration
of any sonic phenomena, including silence, as they relate to music. This is not an
absolute guideline; for example, the study of "music" in the Quadrivium liberal arts
university curriculum that was common in medieval Europe was an abstract system of proportions that was carefully studied at a
distance from actual musical practice. However, this medieval discipline became the basis for tuning systems in later centuries, and
it is generally included in modern scholarship on the history of music theory.

Music theory as a practical discipline encompasses the methods and concepts composers and other musicians use in creating music.
The development, preservation, and transmission of music theory in this sense may be found in oral and written music-making
traditions, musical instruments, and other artifacts. For example, ancient instruments from Mesopotamia, China,
 and prehistoric
sites around the world reveal details about the music they produced and potentially something of the musical theory that might have
been used by their makers (see History of music and Musical instrument). In ancient and living cultures around the world, the deep
and long roots of music theory are clearly visible in instruments, oral traditions, and current music making. Many cultures, at least as
far back as ancient Mesopotamia and ancient China, have also considered music theory in more formal ways such as written treatises
and music notation. Practical and scholarly traditions overlap, as many practical treatises about music place themselves within a
tradition of other treatises, which are cited regularly just as scholarly writing cites earlier research.
In modern academia, music theory is a subfield of musicology, the wider study of musical cultures and history. Etymologically, music
theory is an act of contemplation of music, from the Greek θεωρία, a looking at, viewing, contemplation, speculation, theory, also a
sight, a spectacle. As such, it is often concerned with abstract musical aspects such as tuning and tonal systems, scales, consonance
and dissonance, and rhythmic relationships, but there is also a body of theory concerning practical aspects, such as the creation or the
performance of music, orchestration, ornamentation, improvisation, and electronic sound production. A person who researches,
teaches, or writes articles about music theory is a music theorist. University study, typically to the M.A. or Ph.D level, is required to
teach as a tenure-track music theorist in a US or Canadian university. Methods of analysis include mathematics, graphic analysis, and
especially analysis enabled by Western music notation. Comparative, descriptive, statistical, and other methods are also used. Music
theory textbooks, especially in the United States of America, often include elements of musical acoustics, considerations of musical
notation, and techniques of tonal composition (Harmony and Counterpoint), among other topics
Preserved prehistoric instruments, artifacts, and later depictions of performance in artworks can give clues to the structure of pitch
systems in prehistoric cultures. See for instance Paleolithic flutes, Gǔdí, and Anasazi flute.
Several surviving Sumerian and Akkadian clay tablets include musical information of a theoretical nature, mainly lists of intervals
and tunings. The scholar Sam Mirelman reports that the earliest of these texts dates from before 1500 BCE, a millennium earlier
than surviving evidence from any other culture of comparable musical thought. Further, "All the Mesopotamian texts [about music]
are united by the use of a terminology for music that, according to the approximate dating of the texts, was in use for over 1,000
years."
Much of Chinese music history and theory remains unclear.
The earliest texts about Chinese music theory are inscribed on the stone and bronze bells excavated in 1978 from the tomb of
Marquis Yi (died 433 BCE) of the Zeng state. They include more than 2800 words describing theories and practices of music pitches
of the time. The bells produce two intertwined pentatonic scales three tones apart with additional pitches completing the chromatic
scale.
Chinese theory starts from numbers, the main musical numbers being twelve, five and eight. Twelve refers to the number of pitches
on which the scales can be constructed. The Lüshi chunqiu from about 239 BCE recalls the legend of Ling Lun. On order of the
Yellow Emperor, Ling Lun collected twelve bamboo lengths with thick and even nodes. Blowing on one of these like a pipe, he found
its sound agreeable and named it huangzhong, the "Yellow Bell." He then heard phoenixes singing. The male and female phoenix
each sang six tones. Ling Lun cut his bamboo pipes to match the pitches of the phoenixes, producing twelve pitch pipes in two sets:
six from the male phoenix and six from the female: these were called the lülü or later the shierlü.
The lülü formed the ritual scale to which many instruments were tuned. The name of the lowest sound, huangzhong also implied
'musical correctness.' Its pitch formed a pitch standard, setting the base pitch of zithers, flutes and singers of imperial court
orchestras. Straight-walled pitch pipes without finger holes were made of cast metal, their lengths specified by court regulations.
The resulting chromatic scale provided twelve fundamental notes for the construction of the musical scales themselves. The lülü also
has a cosmological value: its notes describe the energetic frequency of the twelve months of the year, the daily rhythm of the twelve
bi-hours of the Chinese clock, the twelve main acupuncture meridians, etc. 
The two sets of tones (male and female) dividing the twelve-tone scale were generated by the "Method of Subtracting and Adding
Thirds," or sanfen sunyi, which involved alternately rising a fifth and descending a fourth through the subtraction or addition of a
third of the length of the preceding pitch pipe. The resulting pitches produced by adding a third (and descending a fourth) were
referred to by Sima Qian in the Records of the Grand Historian (91 BCE) as pitches of "superior generation," that is, the pitches of
Ling Lun’s male phoenix; the pitches produced by subtracting a third (and ascending a fifth) were referred to as pitches of "inferior
generation," that is, the pitches of Ling Lun’s female phoenix.
"Apart from technical and structural aspects, ancient Chinese music theory also discusses topics such as the nature and functions of
music. The Yueji ("Record of music", c1st and 2nd centuries BCE), for example, manifests Confucian moral theories of
understanding music in its social context. Studied and implemented by Confucian scholar-officials [...], these theories helped form a
musical Confucianism that overshadowed but did not erase rival approaches. These include the assertion of Mozi (c468–c376 BCE)
that music wasted human and material resources, and Laozi’s claim that the greatest music had no sounds. [...] Even the music of the
qin zither, a genre closely affiliated with Confucian scholar-officials, includes many works with Daoist references, such as Tianfeng
huanpei ("Heavenly Breeze and Sounds of Jade Pendants")."
The Samaveda and Yajurveda (c. 1200 – 1000 BCE) are among the earliest testimonies of Indian music, but they contain no theory
properly speaking. The Natya Shastra, written between 200 BCE to 200 CE, discusses intervals (Śrutis), scales (Grāmas),
consonances and dissonances, classes of melodic structure (Mūrchanās, modes?), melodic types (Jātis), instruments, etc.
Early preserved Greek writings on music theory include two types of works: 
technical manuals describing the Greek musical system including notation, scales, consonance and dissonance,
rhythm, and types of musical compositions
treatises on the way in which music reveals universal patterns of order leading to the highest levels of knowledge
and understanding.
Several names of theorists are known before these works, including Pythagoras (c. 570 – c. 495 BCE), Philolaus (c. 470 – c.
385 BCE), Archytas (428–347 BCE), and others.
Works of the first type (technical manuals) include
Anonymous (erroneously attributed to Euclid) Division of the Canon, Κατατομή κανόνος, 4th–3rd century BCE.
Theon of Smyrna, On Mathematics Useful for the Understanding of Plato, Τωv κατά τό μαθηματικόν χρησίμων είς
τήν Πλάτωνος άνάγνωσις, 115–140 CE.
Nicomachus of Gerasa, Manual of Harmonics, Άρμονικόν έγχειρίδιον, 100–150 CE
Cleonides, Introduction to Harmonics, Είσαγωγή άρμονική, 2nd century CE.
Gaudentius, Harmonic Introduction, Άρμονική είσαγωγή, 3d or 4th century CE.
Bacchius Geron, Introduction to the Art of Music, Είσαγωγή τέχνης μουσικής, 4th century CE or later.
Alypius, Introduction to Music, Είσαγωγή μουσική, 4th–5th century CE.
More philosophical treatises of the second type include
Aristoxenus, Harmonic Elements, Άρμονικά στοιχεία, 375/360 – after 320 BCE.
Aristoxenus, Rhythmic Elements, Ρυθμικά στοιχεία.
Claudius Ptolemy, Harmonics, Άρμονικά, 127–148 CE.
Porphyrius, On Ptolemy's Harmonics, Είς τά άρμονικά Πτολεμαίον ύπόμνημα, 232/3-c. 305 CE.
Some imported early Chinese instruments became important components of the entertainment music of the Sui (581–618) and Tang
(618–907) courts: the bent-neck pipa (quxiang pipa), the bili, the konghou and the jiegu. They generated not only new repertories and
performing practices but also new music theories. The pipa, for example, carried with it a theory of musical modes that subsequently
led to the Sui and Tang theory of 84 musical modes.
Medieval Arabic music theorists include:
Abū Yūsuf Ya'qūb al-Kindi († Bagdad, 873 CE), who uses the first twelve letters of the alphabet to describe the
twelve frets on five strings of the oud, producing a chromatic scale of 25 degrees.
The Latin treatise De institutione musicaby the Roman philosopher Boethius (written c. 500) was a touchstone for other writings on
music in medieval Europe. Boethius represented Classical authority on music during the Middle Ages, as the Greek writings on
which he based his work were not read or translated by later Europeans until the 15th century.
 This treatise carefully maintains
distance from the actual practice of music, focusing mostly on the mathematical proportions involved in tuning systems and on the
moral character of particular modes. Several centuries later, treatises began to appear which dealt with the actual composition of
pieces of music in the plainchant tradition. At the end of the ninth century, Hucbald worked towards more precise pitch notation
for the neumes used to record plainchant.
Guido d'Arezzo' wrote in 1028 a letter to Michael of Pomposa, entitled Epistola de ignoto cantu,
 in which he introduced the
practice of using syllables to describe notes and intervals. This was the source of the hexachordal solmization that was to be used
until the end of the Middle Ages. Guido also wrote about emotional qualities of the modes, the phrase structure of plainchant, the
temporal meaning of the neumes, etc.; his chapters on polyphony "come closer to describing and illustrating real music than any
previous account" in the Western tradition.
During the thirteenth century, a new rhythm system called mensural notationgrew out of an earlier, more limited method of notating
rhythms in terms of fixed repetitive patterns, the so-called rhythmic modes, which were developed in France around 1200. An early
form of mensural notation was first described and codified in the treatise Ars cantus mensurabilis("The art of measured chant") by
Franco of Cologne (c. 1280). Mensural notation used different note shapes to specify different durations, allowing scribes to capture
rhythms which varied instead of repeating the same fixed pattern; it is a proportional notation, in the sense that each note value is
equal to two or three times the shorter value, or half or a third of the longer value. This same notation, transformed through various
extensions and improvements during the Renaissance, forms the basis for rhythmic notation in European classical music today
Music is composed of aural phenomena; "music theory" considers how those phenomena apply in music. Music theory considers
melody, rhythm, counterpoint, harmony, form, tonal systems, scales, tuning, intervals, consonance, dissonance, durational
proportions, the acoustics of pitch systems, composition, performance, orchestration, ornamentation, improvisation, electronic sound
production, etc.
Pitch is the lowness or highness of a tone, for example the difference between
middle C and a higher C. The frequency of the sound waves producing a pitch can
be measured precisely, but the perception of pitch is more complex because single
notes from natural sources are usually a complex mix of many frequencies.
Accordingly, theorists often describe pitch as a subjective sensation.
Specific frequencies are often assigned letter names. Today most orchestras assign
Concert A (the A above middle C on the piano) to the frequency of 440 Hz. This
assignment is somewhat arbitrary; for example, in 1859 France, the same A was
tuned to 435 Hz. Such differences can have a noticeable effect on the timbre of instruments and other phenomena. Thus, in
historically informed performance of older music, tuning is often set to match the tuning used in the period when it was written.
Additionally, many cultures do not attempt to standardize pitch, often considering that it should be allowed to vary depending on
genre, style, mood, etc.
The difference in pitch between two notes is called an interval. The most basic interval is the unison, which is simply two notes of the
same pitch. The octave interval is two pitches that are either double or half the frequency of one another. The unique characteristics
of octaves gave rise to the concept of pitch class: pitches of the same letter name that occur in different octaves may be grouped into a
Europe
Renaissance
Baroque
1750–1900
Contemporary
Fundamentals of music
Pitch
Middle C (261.626 Hz) Play .
single "class" by ignoring the difference in octave. For example, a high C and a low C are members of the same pitch class—the class
that contains all C's. 
Musical tuning systems, or temperaments, determine the precise size of intervals. Tuning systems vary widely within and between
world cultures. In Western culture, there have long been several competing tuning systems, all with different qualities. Internationally,
the system known as equal temperament is most commonly used today because it is considered the most satisfactory compromise that
allows instruments of fixed tuning (e.g. the piano) to sound acceptably in tune in all keys.
Notes can be arranged in a variety of scales and modes. Western music
theory generally divides the octave into a series of twelve tones, called a
chromatic scale, within which the interval between adjacent tones is
called a half step or semitone. Selecting tones from this set of 12 and
arranging them in patterns of semitones and whole tones creates other
scales.
The most commonly encountered scales are the seven-toned major, the harmonic minor, the melodic minor, and the natural minor.
Other examples of scales are the octatonic scale and the pentatonic or five-tone scale, which is common in folk music and blues.
Non-Western cultures often use scales that do not correspond with an equally divided twelve-tone division of the octave. For
example, classical Ottoman, Persian, Indian and Arabic musical systems often make use of multiples of quarter tones (half the size of
a semitone, as the name indicates), for instance in 'neutral' seconds (three quarter tones) or 'neutral' thirds (seven quarter tones)—they
do not normally use the quarter tone itself as a direct interval.
In traditional Western notation, the scale used for a composition is usually indicated by a key signature at the beginning to designate
the pitches that make up that scale. As the music progresses, the pitches used may change and introduce a different scale. Music can
be transposed from one scale to another for various purposes, often to accommodate the range of a vocalist. Such transposition raises
or lowers the overall pitch range, but preserves the intervallic relationships of the original scale. For example, transposition from the
key of C major to D major raises all pitches of the scale of C major equally by a whole tone. Since the interval relationships remain
unchanged, transposition may be unnoticed by a listener, however other qualities may change noticeably because transposition
changes the relationship of the overall pitch range compared to the range of the instruments or voices that perform the music. This
often affects the music's overall sound, as well as having technical implications for the performers.
The interrelationship of the keys most commonly used in Western tonal music is conveniently shown by the circle of fifths. Unique
key signatures are also sometimes devised for a particular composition. During the Baroque period, emotional associations with
specific keys, known as the doctrine of the affections, were an important topic in music theory, but the unique tonal colorings of keys
that gave rise to that doctrine were largely erased with the adoption of equal temperament. However, many musicians continue to feel
that certain keys are more appropriate to certain emotions than others. Indian classical music theory continues to strongly associate
keys with emotional states, times of day, and other extra-musical concepts and notably, does not employ equal temperament.
Consonance and dissonance are subjective qualities of the
sonority of intervals that vary widely in different cultures
and over the ages. Consonance (or concord) is the quality
of an interval or chord that seems stable and complete in
itself. Dissonance (or discord) is the opposite in that it
feels incomplete and "wants to" resolve to a consonant
interval. Dissonant intervals seem to clash. Consonant
Scales and modes
A pattern of whole and half steps in the Ionian
mode or major scale on C Play .
Consonance and dissonance
The perfect octave, a
consonant interval Play
The minor second, a
dissonance Play
intervals seem to sound comfortable together. Commonly, perfect fourths, fifths, and octaves and all major and minor thirds and
sixths are considered consonant. All others are dissonant to greater or lesser degree. 
Context and many other aspects can affect apparent dissonance and consonance. For example, in a Debussy prelude, a major second
may sound stable and consonant, while the same interval may sound dissonant in a Bach fugue. In the Common Practice era, the
perfect fourth is considered dissonant when not supported by a lower third or fifth. Since the early 20th century, Arnold Schoenberg’s
concept of "emancipated" dissonance, in which traditionally dissonant intervals can be treated as "higher," more remote consonances,
has become more widely accepted.
Rhythm is produced by the sequential arrangement of sounds and
silences in time. Meter measures music in regular pulse groupings,
called measures or bars. The time signature or meter signature
specifies how many beats are in a measure, and which value of
written note is counted or felt as a single beat.
Through increased stress, or variations in duration or articulation,
particular tones may be accented. There are conventions in most
musical traditions for regular and hierarchical accentuation of beats
to reinforce a given meter. Syncopated rhythms contradict those
conventions by accenting unexpected parts of the beat. Playing
simultaneous rhythms in more than one time signature is called polyrhythm.

In recent years, rhythm and meter have become an important area of research among music scholars. The most highly cited of these
recent scholars are Maury Yeston,
 Fred Lerdahl and Ray Jackendoff,
 Jonathan Kramer,
 and Justin London.

A melody is a series of tones sounding in succession that typically
move toward a climax of tension then resolve to a state of rest.
Because melody is such a prominent aspect in so much music, its
construction and other qualities are a primary interest of music
theory.
The basic elements of melody are pitch, duration, rhythm, and tempo.
The tones of a melody are usually drawn from pitch systems such as
scales or modes. Melody may consist, to increasing degree, of the figure, motive, semi-phrase, antecedent and consequent phrase, and
period or sentence. The period may be considered the complete melody, however some examples combine two periods, or use other
combinations of constituents to create larger form melodies.
A chord, in music, is any harmonic set of three or more notes that is heard as if sounding simultaneously.
 These need not
actually be played together: arpeggios and broken chords may, for many practical and theoretical purposes, constitute chords. Chords
and sequences of chords are frequently used in modern Western, West African, and Oceanian music, whereas they are absent
from the music of many other parts of the world.
The most frequently encountered chords are triads, so called because they consist of three distinct notes: further notes may be added
to give seventh chords, extended chords, or added tone chords. The most common chords are the major and minortriads and then the
augmented and diminished triads. The descriptions major, minor, augmented, and diminished are sometimes referred to collectively
Rhythm
Metric levels: beat level shown in middle with
division levels above and multiple levels below.
Melody
"Pop Goes the Weasel" melody Play
Chord
as chordal quality. Chords are also commonly classed by their root note—so, for instance, the chord C
major may be described as a triad of major quality built on the note C. Chords may also be classified by
inversion, the order in which the notes are stacked.
A series of chords is called a chord progression. Although any chord may in principle be followed by any
other chord, certain patterns of chords have been accepted as establishing key in common-practice
harmony. To describe this, chords are numbered, using Roman numerals (upward from the key-note),
per its diatonic function. Common ways of notating or representing chords in western music other than
conventional staff notation include Roman numerals, figured bass (much used in the Baroque era), macro
symbols (sometimes used in modern musicology), and various systems of chord charts typically found in
the lead sheets used in popular music to lay out the sequence of chords so that the musician may play
accompaniment chords or improvise a solo.
In music, harmony is the use of simultaneous pitches (tones, notes), or chords.
 The study of harmony
involves chords and their construction and chord progressions and the principles of connection that govern
them. Harmony is often said to refer to the "vertical" aspect of music, as distinguished from melodic
line, or the "horizontal" aspect. Counterpoint, which refers to the interweaving of melodic lines, and
polyphony, which refers to the relationship of separate independent voices, are thus sometimes
distinguished from harmony.
In popular and jazz harmony, chords are named by their root plus various terms and
characters indicating their qualities. For example, a lead sheet may indicate chords such
as C major, D minor, and G dominant seventh. In many types of music, notably
Baroque, Romantic, modern, and jazz, chords are often augmented with "tensions". A
tension is an additional chord member that creates a relatively dissonant interval in
relation to the bass. Typically, in the classical common practice perioda dissonant chord
(chord with tension) "resolves" to a consonant chord. Harmonization usually sounds
pleasant to the ear when there is a balance between the consonant and dissonant sounds.
In simple words, that occurs when there is a balance between "tense" and "relaxed"
moments.
Timbre, sometimes called "color", or "tone color," is the principal phenomenon that
allows us to distinguish one instrument from another when both play at the same
pitch and volume, a quality of a voice or instrument often described in terms like
bright, dull, shrill, etc. It is of considerable interest in music theory, especially
because it is one component of music that has as yet, no standardized nomenclature.
It has been called "...the psychoacoustician's multidimensional waste-basket
category for everything that cannot be labeled pitch or loudness," but can be
accurately described and analyzed by Fourier analysis and other methods
because it results from the combination of all sound frequencies, attack and release
envelopes, and other qualities that a tone comprises.
Timbre is principally determined by two things: (1) the relative balance of overtones
produced by a given instrument due its construction (e.g. shape, material), and (2)
the envelope of the sound (including changes in the overtone structure over time).
Timbre varies widely between different instruments, voices, and to lesser degree,
between instruments of the same type due to variations in their construction, and
C Major triad
represented in
staff notation.
Play in just
intonation
Play in Equal
temperament
Play in 1/4-
comma
meantone
Play in
Young
temperament
Play in
Pythagorean
tuning
Harmony
Barbershop quartets, such as this
US Navy group, sing 4-part
pieces, made up of a melody line
(normally the second-highest
voice, called the "lead") and 3
harmony parts.
Timbre
Spectrogram of the first second of an
E9 chord played on a Fender
Stratocaster guitar with noiseless
pickups. Below is the E9 chord
audio:
0:00
significantly, the performer's technique. The timbre of most instruments can be changed by employing different techniques while
playing. For example, the timbre of a trumpet changes when a mute is inserted into the bell, the player changes their embouchure, or
volume.
A voice can change its timbre by the way the performer manipulates their vocal apparatus, (e.g. the shape of the vocal cavity or
mouth). Musical notation frequently specifies alteration in timbre by changes in sounding technique, volume, accent, and other
means. These are indicated variously by symbolic and verbal instruction. For example, the word dolce (sweetly) indicates a nonspecific,
but commonly understood soft and "sweet" timbre. Sul tasto instructs a string player to bow near or over the fingerboard to
produce a less brilliant sound. Cuivre instructs a brass player to produce a forced and stridently brassy sound. Accent symbols like
marcato (^) and dynamic indications (pp) can also indicate changes in timbre.
In music, "dynamics" normally refers to variations of intensity or
volume, as may be measured by physicists and audio engineers in
decibels or phons. In music notation, however, dynamics are not
treated as absolute values, but as relative ones. Because they are
usually measured subjectively, there are factors besides amplitude
that affect the performance or perception of intensity, such as timbre,
vibrato, and articulation.
The conventional indications of dynamics are abbreviations for Italian words like forte (f) for loud and piano (p) for soft. These two
basic notations are modified by indications including mezzo piano (mp) for moderately soft (literally "half soft") and mezzo forte (mf)
for moderately loud, sforzando or sforzato (sfz) for a surging or "pushed" attack, or fortepiano (fp) for a loud attack with a sudden
decrease to a soft level. The full span of these markings usually range from a nearly inaudible pianissississimo (pppp) to a loud-aspossible
fortissississimo (ffff).
Greater extremes of pppppp and fffff and nuances such as p+ or più piano are sometimes found. Other systems of indicating volume
are also used in both notation and analysis: dB (decibels), numerical scales, colored or different sized notes, words in languages other
than Italian, and symbols such as those for progressively increasing volume (crescendo) or decreasing volume (decrescendo), often
called "hairpins" when indicated with diverging or converging lines as shown in the graphic above.
Articulation is the way the performer sounds notes. For example,
staccato is the shortening of duration compared to the written note
value, legato performs the notes in a smoothly joined sequence with
no separation. Articulation is often described rather than quantified,
therefore there is room to interpret how to execute precisely each
articulation.
For example, staccato is often referred to as "separated" or
"detached" rather than having a defined or numbered amount by
which to reduce the notated duration. Violin players use a variety of techniques to perform different qualities of staccato. The manner
in which a performer decides to execute a given articulation is usually based on the context of the piece or phrase, but many
articulation symbols and verbal instructions depend on the instrument and musical period (e.g. viol, wind; classical, baroque; etc.).
There are a set of articulations that most instruments and voices perform in common. They are—from long to short: legato (smooth,
connected); tenuto (pressed or played to full notated duration); marcato (accented and detached); staccato ("separated", "detached");
martelé (heavily accented or "hammered"). Many of these can be combined to create certain "in-between" articulations. For example,
Dynamics
An illustration of hairpins in musical notation.
Articulation
Examples of articulation marks. From left to right:
staccato, staccatissimo, martellato, marcato,
tenuto.
portato is the combination of tenuto and staccato. Some instruments have unique methods by which to produce sounds, such as
spicatto for bowed strings, where the bow bounces off the string.
In music, texture is how the melodic, rhythmic, and harmonic
materials are combined in a composition, thus determining the
overall quality of the sound in a piece. Texture is often described in
regard to the density, or thickness, and range, or width, between
lowest and highest pitches, in relative terms as well as more
specifically distinguished according to the number of voices, or parts,
and the relationship between these voices. For example, a thick
texture contains many "layers" of instruments. One of these layers
could be a string section, or another brass.
The thickness also is affected by the amount and the richness of the instruments playing the piece. The thickness varies from light to
thick. A lightly textured piece will have light, sparse scoring. A thickly or heavily textured piece will be scored for many instruments.
A piece's texture may be affected by the number and character of parts playing at once, the timbre of the instruments or voices
playing these parts and the harmony, tempo, and rhythms used. The types categorized by number and relationship of parts are
analyzed and determined through the labeling of primary textural elements: primary melody, secondary melody, parallel supporting
melody, static support, harmonic support, rhythmic support, and harmonic and rhythmic support. 
Common types included monophonic texture (a single melodic voice, such as a piece for solo soprano or solo flute), biphonic texture
(two melodic voices, such as a duo for bassoon and flute in which the bassoon plays a drone note and the flute plays the melody),
polyphonic texture and homophonic texture (chords accompanying a melody).
The term musical form (or musical architecture) refers to the overall structure or plan of
a piece of music, and it describes the layout of a composition as divided into
sections. In the tenth edition of The Oxford Companion to Music, Percy Scholes
defines musical form as "a series of strategies designed to find a successful mean
between the opposite extremes of unrelieved repetition and unrelieved alteration."
According to Richard Middleton, musical form is "the shape or structure of the work."
He describes it through difference: the distance moved from a repeat; the latter being the
smallest difference. Difference is quantitative and qualitative: how far, and of what type,
different. In many cases, form depends on statement and restatement, unity and variety,
and contrast and connection.
Musical expression is the art of playing or singing music with emotional communication. The elements of music that comprise
expression include dynamic indications, such as forte or piano, phrasing, differing qualities of timbre and articulation, color, intensity,
energy and excitement. All of these devices can be incorporated by the performer. A performer aims to elicit responses of
sympathetic feeling in the audience, and to excite, calm or otherwise sway the audience's physical and emotional responses. Musical
expression is sometimes thought to be produced by a combination of other parameters, and sometimes described as a transcendent
quality that is more than the sum of measurable quantities such as pitch or duration.
Texture
Introduction to Sousa's "Washington Post March,"
mm. 1–7 Play features octave doubling and
a homorhythmic texture.
Form or structure
A musical canon. Encyclopaedia
Britannica calls a "canon" both a
compositional technique and a
musical form.
Expression
Expression on instruments can be closely related to the role of the breath in singing,
and the voice's natural ability to express feelings, sentiment and deep emotions.
Whether these can somehow be categorized is perhaps the realm of academics, who
view expression as an element of musical performance that embodies a consistently
recognizable emotion, ideally causing a sympathetic emotional response in its
listeners. The emotional content of musical expression is distinct from the
emotional content of specific sounds (e.g., a startlingly-loud 'bang') and of learned
associations (e.g., a national anthem), but can rarely be completely separated from
its context.
The components of musical expression continue to be the subject of extensive and
unresolved dispute.
Musical notation is the written or symbolized representation of music. This is most
often achieved by the use of commonly understood graphic symbols and written
verbal instructions and their abbreviations. There are many systems of music
notation from different cultures and different ages. Traditional Western notation
evolved during the Middle Ages and remains an area of experimentation and
innovation.In the 2000s, computer file formats have become important as
well. Spoken language and hand signs are also used to symbolically represent music, primarily in teaching.
In standard Western music notation, tones are represented graphically by symbols (notes) placed on a staff or staves, the vertical axis
corresponding to pitch and the horizontal axis corresponding to time. Note head shapes, stems, flags, ties and dots are used to indicate
duration. Additional symbols indicate keys, dynamics, accents, rests, etc. Verbal instructions from the conductor are often used to
indicate tempo, technique, and other aspects.
In Western music, a range of different music notation systems are used. In Western Classical music, conductors use printed scores
that show all of the instruments' parts and orchestra members read parts with their musical lines written out. In popular styles of
music, much less of the music may be notated. A rock band may go into a recording session with just a handwritten chord chart
indicating the song's chord progressionusing chord names (e.g., C major, D minor, G7, etc.). All of the chord voicings, rhythms and
accompaniment figures are improvised by the band members.
An important skill in music theory is common-practice part writing. While common practice is not incorporated into modern law, its
rules are still helpful in understanding and analyzing music. Common law is based on the rules of counterpoint, which is the set of
rules that were popularized in the 18th and 19th centuries. Counterpoint aims to create harmonies and progressions that were
considered acceptable and enjoyable during that time period. Users of counterpoint included Bach, Handel, Mozart, Beethoven, and
Brahms. This style of writing is often practiced using two parts and divided into different species: 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th, each one
encompassing different ways that parts interact with certain rhythms. This practice is best represented in four-part writing, usually
chorale style with two voice parts per clef. This writing centers around bass, tenor, soprano, and alto voice parts, the bass and tenor
notes being written in the bass clef, and the alto and soprano in the treble. These four voices are used to create chordal progressions.
Common practice does not just apply to four part writing; this can apply to a two part piece as well. There are, however, many rules
to how these progressions must move.
At the beginning of writing, a composer must concentrate on voice or instrument range and spacing. Whether it is an instrument or a
voice, it is important to try to not stretch the range of a part higher or lower than an instrument is usually used to. Spacing is also an
important aspect of part writing. Voice crossing, which is when a part goes higher or lower than the part that is above and below
A violinist performing.
Notation
Tibetan musical score from the 19th
century.
Basics of common-practice part writing
them, is forbidden in common practice part writing. An example of this would be the soprano part going lower that the alto part. A
subset of this rule is voice overlapping, in which instead of crossing in tandem a voice will go higher and lower than their neighbor
just was. For example, the soprano going lower than the alto was the beat immediately before it. 
In part writing, the usage of Conjunct Melodic Motion is important, in which the parts generally move in stepwise motion, and in
counterpoint, if there is a leap (a jump of a fourth or above), the part will progress the opposite direction it just leapt in stepwise
motion. Parts also must progress together in contrary motion, meaning the parts are going in different directions. This is
preferable to parallel motion, where the parts move together, or oblique motion, where one part doesn’t move and another does.
Parallel motion can be used, but it is important to pay attention to intervals in order to avoid breaking counterpoint rules. Dissonant
intervals, both melodic and harmonic intervals are not preferable in most cases. This includes augmented or diminished intervals,
tritones, and seventh chords, simply because they sound very jarring in a piece that is meant to sound pleasant to the ear. Parallel
intervals, which occur when two parts move the same distance creating the same interval twice in a row, are also important to be
aware of. However, this is only a problem when the intervals are either a perfect fifth or a perfect octave. These also can sound
uncomfortable to the ear as they tend to have an open or hollow sound. 
While consonant intervals (intervals of a third or sixth) and perfect intervals (intervals of a fourth, fifth, eighth) are greatly important,
dissonant intervals can occur within music, which is why resolutions are vital. The most basic rule of resolution is to always resolve
the leading tone upwards (the leading tones being the 7th scales degree of the key that the piece is in).  When resolving the seventh
scale degree to the tonic, it creates a sense of satisfaction and completion, relieving the tension that it created. Tritones also must be
resolved correctly. These can occur in triads or seventh chords that are based on scale degree seven, and they must be resolved
correctly. A tritone can either be an augmented fourth intervals or a diminished fifth based on the voicing that the composer uses. In
common practice, an augmented fourth must resolve out, meaning the top voice resolves up and the bottom voice resolves down,
creating a sixth Opposite of that a diminished fifth must resolve in, where the top voice resolves down and the bottom voice resolves
up, creating an interval of a third.
The scholarly study of music theory in the twentieth century has a number of different subfields, each of which takes a different
perspective on what are the primary phenomenon of interest and the most useful methods for investigation.
Musical analysis is the attempt to answer the question how does this music work? The method employed to answer this question, and
indeed exactly what is meant by the question, differs from analyst to analyst, and according to the purpose of the analysis. According
to Ian Bent, "analysis, as a pursuit in its own right, came to be established only in the late 19th century; its emergence as an approach
and method can be traced back to the 1750s. However, it existed as a scholarly tool, albeit an auxiliary one, from the Middle Ages
onwards." Adolf Bernhard Marx was influential in formalising concepts about composition and music understanding towards the
second half of the 19th century. The principle of analysis has been variously criticized, especially by composers, such as Edgard
Varèse's claim that, "to explain by means of [analysis] is to decompose, to mutilate the spirit of a work". 
Schenkerian analysis is a method of musical analysis of tonal music based on the theories of Heinrich Schenker (1868–1935). The
goal of a Schenkerian analysis is to interpret the underlying structure of a tonal work and to help reading the score according to that
structure. The theory's basic tenets can be viewed as a way of defining tonality in music. A Schenkerian analysis of a passage of
music shows hierarchical relationships among its pitches, and draws conclusions about the structure of the passage from this
hierarchy. The analysis makes use of a specialized symbolic form of musical notation that Schenker devised to demonstrate various
techniques of elaboration. The most fundamental concept of Schenker's theory of tonality may be that of tonal space.
 The
intervals between the notes of the tonic triad form a tonal space that is filled with passing and neighbour notes, producing new triads
and new tonal spaces, open for further elaborations until the surface of the work (the score) is reached.
Music theory as academic discipline
Analysis
Although Schenker himself usually presents his
analyses in the generative direction, starting from
the fundamental structure (Ursatz) to reach the
score, the practice of Schenkerian analysis more
often is reductive, starting from the score and
showing how it can be reduced to its fundamental
structure. The graph of the Ursatz is arrhythmic,
as is a strict-counterpoint cantus firmus
exercise. Even at intermediate levels of the
reduction, rhythmic notation (open and closed
noteheads, beams and flags) shows not rhythm
but the hierarchical relationships between the
pitch-events. Schenkerian analysis is subjective.
There is no mechanical procedure involved and
the analysis reflects the musical intuitions of the
analyst. The analysis represents a way of
hearing (and reading) a piece of music.
Transformational theory is a branch of music
theory developed by David Lewin in the 1980s,
and formally introduced in his 1987 work, Generalized Musical Intervals and Transformations. The theory, which models musical
transformations as elements of a mathematical group, can be used to analyze both tonal and atonal music. The goal of
transformational theory is to change the focus from musical objects—such as the "C major chord" or "G major chord"—to relations
between objects. Thus, instead of saying that a C major chord is followed by G major, a transformational theorist might say that the
first chord has been "transformed" into the second by the "Dominant operation." (Symbolically, one might write "Dominant(C major)
= G major.") While traditional musical set theory focuses on the makeup of musical objects, transformational theory focuses on the
intervals or types of musical motion that can occur. According to Lewin's description of this change in emphasis, "[The
transformational] attitude does not ask for some observed measure of extension between reified 'points'; rather it asks: 'If I am at s
and wish to get to t, what characteristic gesture should I perform in order to arrive there?'"
Music psychology or the psychology of music may be regarded as a branch of both psychology and musicology. It aims to explain
and understand musical behavior and experience, including the processes through which music is perceived, created, responded to,
and incorporated into everyday life. Modern music psychology is primarily empirical; its knowledge tends to advance on the
basis of interpretations of data collected by systematic observation of and interaction with human participants. Music psychology is a
field of research with practical relevance for many areas, including music performance, composition, education, criticism, and
therapy, as well as investigations of human aptitude, skill, intelligence, creativity, and social behavior.
Music psychology can shed light on non-psychological aspects of musicology and musical practice. For example, it contributes to
music theory through investigations of the perception and computational modellingof musical structures such as melody, harmony,
tonality, rhythm, meter, and form. Research in music history can benefit from systematic study of the history of musical syntax, or
from psychological analyses of composers and compositions in relation to perceptual, affective, and social responses to their music.
Ethnomusicology can benefit from psychological approaches to the study of music cognition in different cultures.

A music genre is a conventional category that identifies some pieces of music as belonging to a shared tradition or set of
conventions. It is to be distinguished from musical form and musical style, although in practice these terms are sometimes used
interchangeably.

Typically a given work is analyzed by more than one person and
different or divergent analyses are created. For instance, the first two
bars of the prelude to Claude Debussy's Pelléas et Melisande are
analyzed differently by Leibowitz, Laloy, van Appledorn, and Christ.
Leibowitz analyses this succession harmonically as D minor:I-VII-V,
ignoring melodic motion, Laloy analyses the succession as D:I-V,
seeing the G in the second measure as an ornament, and both van
Appledorn and Christ analyses the succession as D:I-VII. Play
Music perception and cognition
Genre and technique
Music can be divided into different genres in many
different ways. The artistic nature of music means that
these classifications are often subjective and controversial,
and some genres may overlap. There are even varying
academic definitions of the term genre itself. In his book
Form in Tonal Music, Douglass M. Green distinguishes
between genre and form. He lists madrigal, motet, canzona,
ricercar, and dance as examples of genres from the
Renaissance period. To further clarify the meaning of
genre, Green writes, "Beethoven's Op. 61 and
Mendelssohn's Op. 64 are identical in genre—both are
violin concertos—but different in form. However, Mozart's
Rondo for Piano, K. 511, and the Agnus Dei from his Mass,
K. 317 are quite different in genre but happen to be similar
in form." Some, like Peter van der Merwe, treat the
terms genre and style as the same, saying that genre should
be defined as pieces of music that came from the same style
or "basic musical language."
Others, such as Allan F. Moore, state that genre and style
are two separate terms, and that secondary characteristics such as subject
matter can also differentiate between genres. A music genre or subgenre
may also be defined by the musical techniques, the style, the cultural context,
and the content and spirit of the themes. Geographical origin is sometimes
used to identify a music genre, though a single geographical category will
often include a wide variety of subgenres. Timothy Laurie argues that "since
the early 1980s, genre has graduated from being a subset of popular music
studies to being an almost ubiquitous framework for constituting and
evaluating musical research objects".
Musical technique is the ability of instrumental and vocal musicians to exert
optimal control of their instruments or vocal cords to produce precise
musical effects. Improving technique generally entails practicing exercises
that improve muscular sensitivity and agility. To improve technique,
musicians often practice fundamental patterns of notes such as the natural, minor, major, and chromatic scales, minor and major
triads, dominant and diminished sevenths, formula patterns and arpeggios. For example, triads and sevenths teach how to play chords
with accuracy and speed. Scales teach how to move quickly and gracefully from one note to another (usually by step). Arpeggios
teach how to play broken chordsover larger intervals. Many of these components of music are found in compositions, for example, a
scale is a very common element of classical and romantic era compositions.
Heinrich Schenker argued that musical technique's "most striking and distinctive characteristic" is repetition.
 Works known as
études (meaning "study") are also frequently used for the improvement of technique.
Music theorists sometimes use mathematics to understand music, and although music has no axiomatic foundation in modern
mathematics, mathematics is "the basis of sound" and sound itself "in its musical aspects... exhibits a remarkable array of number
properties", simply because nature itself "is amazingly mathematical". The attempt to structure and communicate new ways of
composing and hearing music has led to musical applications of set theory, abstract algebra and number theory. Some composers
have incorporated the golden ratio and Fibonacci numbers into their work. There is a long history of examining the
Deutsch's scale illusion: an auditory illusion in which two
scales are presented with successive tones alternating
between each ear but are perceived as simultaneous,
unbroken scales.
A Classical piano trio is a group that plays
chamber music, including sonatas. The term
"piano trio" also refers to works composed
for such a group.
Mathematics
relationships between music and mathematics. Though ancient Chinese, Egyptians and Mesopotamians are known to have studied the
mathematical principles of sound, the Pythagoreans (in particular Philolaus and Archytas)
 of ancient Greece were the first
researchers known to have investigated the expression of musical scales in terms of numerical ratios.
In the modern era, musical set theory uses the
language of mathematical set theory in an
elementary way to organize musical objects and
describe their relationships. To analyze the
structure of a piece of (typically atonal) music
using musical set theory, one usually starts with a
set of tones, which could form motives or chords.
By applying simple operations such as
transposition and inversion, one can discover deep
structures in the music. Operations such as transposition and inversion are called isometries because they preserve the intervals
between tones in a set. Expanding on the methods of musical set theory, some theorists have used abstract algebra to analyze music.
For example, the pitch classes in an equally tempered octave form an abelian group with 12 elements. It is possible to describe just
intonation in terms of a free abelian group.

In music theory, serialism is a method or technique of composition that uses a series
of values to manipulate different musical elements. Serialism began primarily with
Arnold Schoenberg's twelve-tone technique, though his contemporaries were also
working to establish serialism as one example of post-tonal thinking. Twelve-tone
technique orders the twelve notes of the chromatic scale, forming a row or series and
providing a unifying basis for a composition's melody, harmony, structural
progressions, and variations. Other types of serialism also work with sets,
collections of objects, but not necessarily with fixed-order series, and extend the
technique to other musical dimensions (often called "parameters"), such as duration, dynamics, and timbre. The idea of serialism is
also applied in various ways in the visual arts, design, and architecture
"Integral serialism" or "total serialism" is the use of series for aspects such as duration, dynamics, and register as well as pitch. 
Other terms, used especially in Europe to distinguish post–World War II serial music from twelve-tone music and its American
extensions, are "general serialism" and "multiple serialism".
Musical set theory provides concepts for categorizing musical objects and describing their relationships. Many of the notions were
first elaborated by Howard Hanson (1960) in connection with tonal music, and then mostly developed in connection with atonal
music by theorists such as Allen Forte (1973), drawing on the work in twelve-tone theory of Milton Babbitt. The concepts of set
theory are very general and can be applied to tonal and atonal styles in any equally tempered tuning system, and to some extent more
generally than that.
One branch of musical set theory deals with collections (sets and permutations) of pitches and pitch classes (pitch-class set theory),
which may be ordered or unordered, and can be related by musical operations such as transposition, inversion, and complementation.
The methods of musical set theory are sometimes applied to the analysis of rhythm as well.
Music semiology (semiotics) is the study of signs as they pertain to music on a variety of levels. Following Roman Jakobson, Kofi
Agawu adopts the idea of musical semiosis being introversive or extroversive—that is, musical signs within a text and without.
"Topics," or various musical conventions (such as horn calls, dance forms, and styles), have been treated suggestively by Agawu,
among others. The notion of gesture is beginning to play a large role in musico-semiotic enquiry.
The first 16 harmonics, their names and frequencies, showing the
exponential nature of the octave and the simple fractional nature of
non-octave harmonics.
Serial composition and set theory
Tone row from Alban Berg's Lyric
Suite, mov. I. Play
Musical semiotics
"There are strong arguments that music inhabits a
semiological realm which, on both ontogenetic and
phylogenetic levels, has developmental priority over
verbal language."
Writers on music semiology include Kofi Agawu (on topical theory, Schenkerian
analysis), Robert Hatten (on topic, gesture), Raymond Monelle (on topic, musical
meaning), Jean-Jacques Nattiez (on introversive taxonomic analysis and
ethnomusicological applications), Anthony Newcomb (on narrativity), and Eero
Tarasti (generally considered the founder of musical semiotics).
Roland Barthes, himself a semiotician and skilled amateur pianist, wrote about
music in Image-Music-Text, The Responsibilities of Form, and Eiffel Tower, though
he did not consider music to be a semiotic system.
Signs, meanings in music, happen essentially through the connotations of sounds,
and through the social construction, appropriation and amplification of certain
meanings associated with these connotations. The work of Philip Tagg (Ten Little
Tunes, Fernando the Flute, Music’s Meanings) provides one of the most complete and systematic analysis of the relation between
musical structures and connotations in western and especially popular, television and film music. The work of Leonard Meyer in
Style and Musictheorizes the relationship between ideologies and musical structures and the phenomena of style change, and focuses
on romanticism as a case study.
Music theory in the practical sense has been a part of education at conservatories and
music schools for centuries, but the status music theory currently has within
academic institutions is relatively recent. In the 1970s, few universities had
dedicated music theory programs, many music theorists had been trained as
composers or historians, and there was a belief among theorists that the teaching of
music theory was inadequate and that the subject was not properly recognised as a
scholarly discipline in its own right. A growing number of scholars began
promoting the idea that music theory should be taught by theorists, rather than
composers, performers or music historians. This led to the founding of the
Society for Music Theory in the United States in 1977. In Europe, the French Société
d'Analyse musicalewas founded in 1985. It called the First European Conference of
Music Analysis for 1989, which resulted in the foundation of the Société belge
d'Analyse musicalein Belgium and the Gruppo analisi e teoria musicale in Italy the
same year, the Society for Music Analysis in the UK in 1991, the Vereniging voor
Muziektheorie in the Netherlands in 1999 and the Gesellschaft für Musiktheorie in Germany in 2000. They were later followed
by the Russian Society for Music Theory in 2013 and the Polish Society for Music Analysis in 2015, and others are in construction.
These societies coordinate the publication of music theory scholarship and support the professional development of music theory
researchers.
As part of their initial training, music theorists will typically complete a B.Mus or a B.A. in music (or a related field) and in many
cases an M.A. in music theory. Some individuals apply directly from a bachelor's degree to a Ph.D, and in these cases, they may not
receive an M.A. In the 2010s, given the increasingly interdisciplinary nature of university graduate programs, some applicants for
music theory Ph.D programs may have academic training both in music and outside of music (e.g., a student may apply with a B.Mus
and a Masters in Music Composition or Philosophy of Music).
Semiotician Roman Jakobson.
Education and careers
Columbia University music theorist
Pat Carpenter in a 2013 photo.
Most music theorists work as instructors, lecturers or professors in colleges, universities or conservatories. The job market for tenuretrack
professor positions is very competitive. Applicants must hold a completed Ph.D or the equivalent degree (or expect to receive
one within a year of being hired—called an "ABD", for "All But Dissertation" stage) and (for more senior positions) have a strong
record of publishing in peer-reviewed journals. Some Ph.D-holding music theorists are only able to find insecure positions as
sessional lecturers. The job tasks of a music theorist are the same as those of a professor in any other humanities discipline: teaching
undergraduate and/or graduate classes in this area of specialization and, in many cases some general courses (such as Music
Appreciation or Introduction to Music Theory), conducting research in this area of expertise, publishing research articles in peerreviewed
journals, authoring book chapters, books or textbooks, traveling to conferences to present papers and learn about research in
the field, and, if the program includes a graduate school, supervising M.A. and Ph.D students and giving them guidance on the
preparation of their theses and dissertations. Some music theory professors may take on senior administrative positions in their
institution, such as Dean or Chair of the School of Music.
Blood Sugar Sex Magik is the fifth studio album by American rock band Red Hot Chili Peppers, released on September 24, 1991. Produced by Rick Rubin, it was the band's first record released on Warner Bros. Records. The musical styles of Blood Sugar Sex Magik differed notably from the techniques employed on the Chili Peppers' preceding album, Mother's Milk, and featured little use of heavy metal guitar riffs. The album's subject matter incorporated sexual innuendos and references to drugs and death as well as themes of lust and exuberance.
Peaking at number one in Australia, Canada, and New Zealand, and at three on the United States' Billboard 200, the album has sold over 13 million copies worldwide and was the Red Hot Chili Peppers' introduction into worldwide popularity and critical acclaim. Blood Sugar Sex Magik produced an array of hit singles including the hugely successful "Under the Bridge" and one of their most popular songs, "Give It Away". The other three singles released were "Suck My Kiss", "Breaking the Girl", and "If You Have to Ask". Guitarist John Frusciante quit the band mid-tour in 1992 (not returning until 1998) due to his inability to cope with the album's popularity. Blood Sugar Sex Magik is recognized as an influential and seminal component of the alternative rock explosion in the early 1990s. Steve Huey of AllMusic stated that Blood Sugar Sex Magik is "probably the best album the Chili Peppers will ever make".
The band's previous album, 1989's Mother's Milk would become the band's second album to enter in the Billboard 200, peaking at number 52 and at the time the biggest of their career. Although the record was mildly successful, production was weighed down by producer Michael Beinhorn. He convinced Frusciante to play with an overall heavier tone, and instructed Kiedis to write lyrics that would be more radio viable, thus causing the band to feel restricted creatively.
As the Chili Peppers's contract with EMI came to an end, they began looking for a new record company to release their next album. The group reached a consensus to go with Sony BMG/Epic, with the proviso that they buy out their last album from EMI. Even though the label promised it would take only a few days, the process stretched out into several months. Although a deal had been made with Sony/Epic, Mo Ostin of Warner Bros. Records called Kiedis to congratulate him on the successful deal, and complimented the rival record label. Kiedis recalled of the situation: "The coolest, most real person we had met during all these negotiations had just personally called to encourage me to make a great record for a rival company. That was the kind of guy I'd want to be working for." The group pursued the idea, and eventually dropped the contract with Sony in favor of a deal with Warner Bros. Ostin called an old friend at EMI, who immediately allowed for the label transfer.
Now settled into Warner Bros. Records, the Chili Peppers began looking for a suitable producer. One person in particular, Rick Rubin, stood out, as he was more broadminded in contrast to individuals they had worked with in the past even though Rubin previously turned down the band's offer to produce their 1987 album The Uplift Mofo Party Plan due to the drug problems of Kiedis and guitarist Hillel Slovak who would die of a heroin overdose a year later. Eventually, the band decided Rubin would be the best choice as a producer, and therefore hired him to produce what would become Blood Sugar Sex Magik. Unlike the Peppers' previous producers, Rubin was someone that they felt confident to ask for guidance and input during times of difficulty. He would often help arrange drum beats, guitar melodies and lyrics.
The band sought to record the album in an unconventional setting, believing it would enhance their creative output. Rubin suggested the mansion magician Harry Houdini once lived in, to which they agreed. A crew was hired to set up a recording studio and other equipment required for production in the house. The band decided that they would remain inside the mansion for the duration of recording, though according to Kiedis, Smith was convinced the location was haunted, and refused to stay. He would, instead, come each day by motorcycle. Smith himself disputes this account, and instead claims the real reason he did not stay at The Mansion was because he wanted to be with his wife. Frusciante, however, disagreed with Smith, and said "There are definitely ghosts in the house," and Frusciante felt they were "very friendly. We [the band] have nothing but warm vibes and happiness everywhere we go in this house."
Frusciante, Kiedis, and Flea each had their own separate rooms at each end of the house. When not recording with the band, Frusciante would spend his time painting, listening to music, reading and recording songs he'd written. Due to the seclusion, Kiedis ended up recording all his vocals in his room, as it was large enough to accommodate the recording equipment. For over thirty days, the Chili Peppers worked inside the house; Kiedis felt it was an accommodating and resourceful environment which allowed him to complete the rest of the lyrics. During production, the band agreed to let Flea's brother-in-law document the creative process on film. When the album's recording was complete, the Chili Peppers released the film, titled Funky Monks.
"Give It Away", the first single from the record, combined funky guitar riffs and prominent sexual references with an overall "drier" guitar sound attributed to producer Rick Rubin.
"Under the Bridge"
MENU0:00
"Under the Bridge", the second single from Blood Sugar Sex Magik, was a reflective and melodic composition that would go on to become one of the defining songs of the nineties. The track reached number two on the Billboard Hot 100 in early 1992.
Problems playing these files? See media help.
Blood Sugar Sex Magik was written at a more rapid pace than the band's previous album. Before the Chili Peppers relocated into the mansion, Frusciante and Kiedis collaborated at each other's homes, in order to arrange song structures and guitar riffs. The band then presented ideas to Flea and Smith, and as a whole, they decided on what they would use for the bass, guitar, vocal and percussion ensembles.
Kiedis focused lyrically on sexual references and innuendos, as they were frequently on his mind. Songs such as "Suck My Kiss", "If You Have to Ask", "Sir Psycho Sexy", "Give It Away" and "Blood Sugar Sex Magik" all contained various sexual links, with lyrics like "A state of sexual light / Kissing her virginity / My affinity" and "Glorious euphoria / Is my must / Erotic shock / Is a function of lust." The concept behind "The Greeting Song" was a request Rubin that had made. Rubin asked Kiedis to write a song solely about girls and cars. Although Kiedis disliked the concept, he wrote the song as Rubin requested and ended up disliking almost every one of the lyrics' aspects. Kiedis also began writing songs about anguish, and the self mutilating thoughts he experienced thanks to his addition to both heroin and cocaine; he believed that his life had come to its lowest point under a bridge in downtown Los Angeles. Over a month later, Rubin stumbled upon a poem that eventually become the lyrics to "Under the Bridge". Also, he suggested that Kiedis would show it to the band's other members. However, Kiedis was apprehensive because he thought the lyrics were "too soft" and different from the band's style. After singing the verse to Frusciante, the band started working on the song's structure the song the next day. Both Rubin and Kiedis worked several hours on arranging the song's chords and melodies until they both accepted it as complete. Frusciante ultimately chose the chords he played in the intro so it could balance out the song's depressing atmosphere: "my brain interpreted it as being a really sad song so I thought if the lyrics are really sad like that I should write some chords that are happier." "Naked in the Rain" was among the first songs that the band wrote for the album. The Chilli Peppers even played once at the end of the Mother's Milk Tour in 1990, while the intros for "The Greeting Song" and "Sir Psycho Sexy" were also teased during the end of that tour; however, neither song was completed or had lyrics.
Blood Sugar Sex Magik integrated the band's typical punk and funk style, but moved away from all that with more melodically driven songs. Tracks like "The Righteous and the Wicked", "Suck My Kiss", "Blood Sugar Sex Magik", "Give it Away", and "Funky Monks" still incorporated the use of heavy metal guitar riffs, but they differed from Mother's Milk since they contained less distortion. Flea, who had centered his bass playing around the slapping technique, downplayed on this favoring more traditional and melodic bass lines. He even adopted a minimalist, "less is more" philosophy, saying, "I was trying to play simply on Blood Sugar Sex Magik because I had been playing too much prior to that, so I thought, 'I've really got to chill out and play half as many notes'. When you play less, it's more exciting—there's more room for everything. If I do play something busy, it stands out, instead of the bass being a constant onslaught of notes. Space is good." Kiedis thought that the album had expanded the Chili Peppers' musical horizons and served as a departure from their previous material. One of Blood Sugar Sex Magik's more melodic tracks, "Breaking the Girl", was written about Kiedis' constantly shifting relationships. He feared that he was following in his father's footsteps and simply becoming a womanizer, rather than establishing stable and long-term relationships: "As exciting and temporarily fulfilling as this constant influx of interesting and beautiful girls can be, at the end of the day, that shit is lonely and you're left with nothing." The track also featured a bridge in the middle, consisting of percussion instruments salvaged from a garbage dump.
Although jams had always served as an integral aspect of song creation for the Chili Peppers, Blood Sugar Sex Magik saw songs containing more structure. One specific jam caused the breakout song on the album: Frusciante, Flea, and Smith were all playing together—with Kiedis at another part of the room watching—when "Flea started playing this insane bass line, and Chad cracked up and played along ... I always had fragments of song ideas or even specific isolated phrases in my mind. I (Kiedis) took the mic and belted out 'Give it away, give it away, give it away, give it away now." The philosophy behind the lyrics came from a conversation that Kiedis had with Nina Hagen, regarding selflessness and how insignificant material possessions were in his life. It, thus, gave developed the song "Give It Away". He also been reminisced about late Chili Peppers guitarist Hillel Slovak, composing "My Lovely Man" in his memory. Kiedis wrote "Sir Psycho Sexy" as an over-zealous and overly exaggerated version of himself; a figure that could get any woman, and do anything he pleased to them. "The Power of Equality" confronted topics concerning racial equality, prejudice, and sexism. Kiedis wrote "I Could Have Lied" to document the brief relationship he had with Irish singer Sinéad O'Connor.
Deep Purple at Wacken Open Air 2013 27.jpg
L–R: Ian Paice, Roger Glover, Ian Gillan, Steve Morse and Don Airey performing live in 2013
Deep Purple are an English rock band formed in Hertford in 1968. The band is considered to be among the pioneers of heavy metal and modern hard rock, although their musical approach changed over the years. Originally formed as a progressive rock band, the band shifted to a heavier sound in 1970. Deep Purple, together with Led Zeppelin and Black Sabbath, have been referred to as the "unholy trinity of British hard rock and heavy metal in the early to mid-seventies". They were listed in the 1975 Guinness Book of World Records as "the globe's loudest band" for a 1972 concert at London's Rainbow Theatre, and have sold over 100 million albums worldwide.
Deep Purple have had several line-up changes and an eight-year hiatus (1976–1984). The 1968–1976 line-ups are commonly labelled Mark I, II, III and IV. Their second and most commercially successful line-up consisted of Ian Gillan (vocals), Jon Lord (keyboards, backing vocals), Roger Glover (bass), Ian Paice (drums), and Ritchie Blackmore (guitar). This line-up was active from 1969 to 1973, and was revived from 1984 to 1989, and again from 1992 to 1993. The band achieved more modest success in the intervening periods between 1968 and 1969 with the line-up including Rod Evans (lead vocals) and Nick Simper (bass, backing vocals), between 1974 and 1976 (Tommy Bolin replacing Blackmore in 1975) with the line-up including David Coverdale (lead vocals) and Glenn Hughes (bass, vocals), and between 1989 and 1992 with the line-up including Joe Lynn Turner (vocals). The band's line-up (currently including Ian Gillan, and guitarist Steve Morse from 1994) has been much more stable in recent years, although keyboardist Jon Lord's retirement from the band in 2002 (being succeeded by Don Airey) left Ian Paice as the only original Deep Purple member still in the band.
Deep Purple were ranked number 22 on VH1's Greatest Artists of Hard Rock programme and a poll on British radio station Planet Rock ranked them 5th among the "most influential bands ever". The band received the Legend Award at the 2008 World Music Awards. Deep Purple (specifically Blackmore, Lord, Paice, Gillan, Glover, Coverdale, Evans and Hughes) were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2016.
In 1967, former Searchers drummer Chris Curtis contacted London businessman Tony Edwards, in the hope that he would manage a new group he was putting together, to be called Roundabout. Curtis' vision was a "supergroup" where the band members would get on and off, like a musical roundabout. Impressed with the plan, Edwards agreed to finance the venture with his two business partners John Coletta and Ron Hire, who comprised Hire-Edwards-Coletta Enterprises (HEC).
The first recruit to the band was the classically trained Hammond organ player Jon Lord, Curtis' flatmate who had most notably played with the Artwoods (led by Art Wood, brother of future Rolling Stones guitarist Ronnie Wood, and including Keef Hartley). Lord was then performing in a backing band for the vocal group The Flower Pot Men (formerly known as the Ivy League), along with bassist Nick Simper and drummer Carlo Little. Simper had previously been in Johnny Kidd and the Pirates and survived the 1966 car crash that killed Kidd. Lord put the two on alert that he'd been recruited for the Roundabout project, after which Simper and Little suggested guitarist Ritchie Blackmore, whom Lord had never met. Simper had known Blackmore since the early 1960s when his first band, the Renegades, debuted around the same time as one of Blackmore's early bands, the Dominators.
HEC persuaded Blackmore to return from Hamburg to audition for the new group. Blackmore was making a name for himself as a studio session guitarist, and had also been a member of the Outlaws, Screaming Lord Sutch, and Neil Christian. Curtis' erratic behaviour and lifestyle, fuelled by LSD use, caused a sudden disinterest in the project he had started, forcing HEC to dismiss him from Roundabout. But HEC was now intrigued with the possibilities Lord and Blackmore brought, while Lord and Blackmore were also keen to continue. The two carried on, recruiting additional members and keeping Tony Edwards as their manager. Lord convinced Simper to join for good, but left Carlo Little behind in favour of drummer Bobby Woodman.
In March 1968, Lord, Blackmore, Simper and Woodman moved into Deeves Hall, a country house in South Mimms, Hertfordshire. The band would live, write and rehearse at Deeves Hall, which was fully kitted out with the latest Marshall amplification. According to Simper, "dozens" of singers were auditioned (including Rod Stewart and Woodman's friend Dave Curtiss) until the group heard Rod Evans of the club band The Maze, and thought his voice fit their style well. Tagging along with Evans was his band's drummer, Ian Paice. Blackmore had seen Paice on tour with The Maze in Germany in 1966, and had been impressed by the 18-year-old's drumming. The band hastily arranged an audition for Paice, given that Woodman was vocally unhappy with the direction of the band's music. Both Paice and Evans won their respective jobs, and the line-up was complete.
During a brief tour of Denmark and Sweden in April, in which they were still billed as Roundabout, Blackmore suggested a new name: "Deep Purple", named after his grandmother's favourite song. The group had resolved to choose a name after everyone had posted one on a board in rehearsal. Second to Deep Purple was "Concrete God", which the band thought was too harsh to take on.
Fightstar
A man with a guitar singing into a microphone, with another musician playing a bass guitar
Frontman Charlie Simpson (left) and bassist Dan Haigh in 2010
Post-hardcore heavy metal emo alternative rock
PIAS Gut Island Trustkill Deep Elm
Associated acts	Gunship
Website	fightstarmusic.com
Charlie Simpson
Fightstar are a British rock band from London that formed in 2003. The band is composed of lead vocalist, guitarist and keyboardist Charlie Simpson, guitarist and co-vocalist Alex Westaway, bassist Dan Haigh and drummer Omar Abidi. Generally considered a post-hardcore band, Fightstar are known to incorporate metal, alternative rock and other genres into their sound. During the band's early days, they were viewed sceptically by critics because of Simpson's former pop career with Busted. Their live shows got a more positive reaction, and their 2005 debut EP, They Liked You Better When You Were Dead, was a critical success.
The band released their debut studio album, Grand Unification, the following year; Kerrang! editor Paul Brannigan called it "one of the best British rock albums of the last decade". Fightstar received a nomination for Best British Band at the 2006 Kerrang! Awards before releasing their second album, One Day Son, This Will All Be Yours, in 2007. A compilation album including B-sides and rarities, Alternate Endings, was released the following year. The band self-funded and co-produced their third album, Be Human (2009), which featured orchestral and choral elements. It was their highest-charting album, peaking at number 20 on the UK Albums Chart.
Fightstar went on hiatus in 2010, allowing its members to concentrate on other projects. This included two folk-oriented solo records by Simpson and a synthwave side project operated by Westaway and Haigh called Gunship. Fightstar reunited in 2014 and released their fourth studio album, Behind the Devil's Back, the following year. The record added electronic elements to their eclectic sound. All four studio albums have charted in the top 40 and received critical praise.
In 2003, when Charlie Simpson was still a member of the pop punk band Busted, he met fellow songwriter-guitarist Alex Westaway and drummer Omar Abidi at a party. During the party, an impromptu jam session took place. Simpson, Westaway and Abidi played a loop of Rage Against the Machine's "Killing in the Name", and agreed to attend a gig a few days later. After the show, they returned to Simpson's flat and played guitars and a v-drum kit; they then wrote their first song, "Too Much Punch". Westaway later invited his school friend Haigh to practise with the band, and they began booking rehearsal sessions. Abidi was studying sound engineering at college, and guitarist Alex Westaway had recently moved to London after dropping out of university. Future bassist Dan Haigh, also based in London, worked for a game development company.
Simpson was becoming increasingly frustrated with Busted's music because he could not explore his own creative desires. The music he wrote did not fit Busted's established pop style. Simpson's time with Fightstar reportedly caused tension in Busted, which was amplified when Fightstar announced a 14-date UK tour. Simpson told Busted's manager in December 2004 over the phone that he was leaving the pop trio to focus on Fightstar, and wanted to do something his "heart was in". At a press conference at the Soho Hotel in London on 14 January 2005, Busted's record label announced that the band had split up after Simpson's departure several weeks earlier.
Although Fightstar's style is widely known as post-hardcore, they have incorporated diverse musical influences and have been called metal, emo, and alternative rock. According to Kerrang!, the band's influences are post-rock, heavy metal and hardcore punk. Simpson echoed this, describing their musical aim as trying to "combine the light and dark shades, to make something utterly brutal and really heavy and on the other side have something really delicate and beautiful. The fusion of those things is what Fightstar does."
Though the band have been labeled emo, they have tried to avoid writing in that fashion. Grand Unification and One Day Son, This Will All Be Yours' themes were apocalyptic, and subsequent work varied from patriotism ("The English Way") to self-loathing ("Damocles" and "Animal"). Fightstar have been influenced by author Chuck Palahniuk, films and comics such as the Neon Genesis Evangelion series.
In his review of Grand Unification (2006), Vik Bansal of MusicOMH wrote about their varied dynamics: "Where others are happy to be one-dimensional, Fightstar are not content unless a song moves fluidly through seemingly incongruous but ultimately coherent moods and musical dynamics. The interspersion of thoroughly heavy metal sections within the otherwise widescreen rock of 'Grand Unification Pt I' and 'Sleep Well Tonight' encapsulates this perfectly". One Day Son, This Will All Be Yours showed the band expanding their sound and pushing further into both lighter and heavier territories, with a mixture of more melodic soundscapes and heavier metallic styles. According to Q magazine, "The intricate instrumental passages, multi-tracked vocal harmonies and pounding riffs hint at Muse-scale ambition and intellect". The Sun described One Day Son, This Will All Be Yours' sound as "heavier, slicker and as focused as ever, tracks such as '99' and 'We Apologise For Nothing' embrace an epic, panoramic sound that sweeps you off your feet. It’s aggressive but emotive, with heaps of melody among the huge riffs."
Fightstar's third album, Be Human (2009), featured choral and orchestral elements. Emma Johnston of Kerrang! emphasised this in her review: "Fightstar throw as many orchestral and choral flourishes at their muscular, solemnly heavy rock as it could take without drowning". Anton Djamoos of AbsolutePunk wrote that the album has a "certain symphonic quality" which is "a departure from the general body of work we've seen in the past. They break from their own norm with several orchestral elements to make the album sound more full and let the music hit even harder". Matt Shoemaker of 411mania.com described the album as typical Fightstar ("[a] range from pure metal to alternative rock to bordering on emo at times"), influenced by progressive rock, acoustic and country pop in addition to its orchestral and choral elements.
Behind the Devil's Back (2015) was noted for a heavier use of electronics than in the past, said by some critics to be reminiscent of Westaway and Haigh's side project Gunship. The Edge and Rocksins.com reviewers remarked in particular the album's 1980s-style synths, while NE:MM writer David Smith drew comparisons to American alternative rock supergroup Angels & Airwaves.
Fightstar have said that they are influenced by a variety of music (particularly film scores), citing Nirvana, Deftones, Radiohead, Silverchair, Pantera, Mono, Explosions in the Sky, Elliott Smith, The Cure and Jeff Buckley as inspirations. Abidi called Deftones the band with whom he would most like to perform: "If I got to play with (them), that'd be it, you could stick a fork in me."
What songs hits you emotionally?
Deep Purple ammounce world tour
Red Hot Chili Peppers ammounce world tour